B4 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
two possibilities have the status of radical alternatives. Two related ideas, also 
radical but not so easy to locate in relation to materialism, are biopsychism 
and the integrated information theory. I will argue later that all of these rad-
ical alternatives have a place in the zone of reasonable disagreement. But ﬁrst, 
let us zoom in on the materialist orthodoxy.
A materialist (or physicalist) regards conscious experience as grounded in 
(and perhaps identical to or constituted by) complex arrangements of phys-
ic al properties, such as the physical properties of brains. For the materialist, 
experience may not seem physical, but it is physical. To the extent that it 
seems otherwise, this is misleading. This very general commitment leaves 
room for many varieties of materialism and various ways of carving up the 
space of materialist theories.11
To me, as someone whose concern is with the edge of sentience, the most 
salient division among materialists is between those who hold that conscious 
experience is a single, uniﬁed natural kind and those who see ‘conscious expe-
rience’ and related terms (such as ‘phenomenal consciousness’, ‘qualities’, ‘raw 
feels’, and ‘what it’s like to be you’) as terms that point indeterminately 
towards two or more diﬀerent kinds that can come apart, so that we will even-
tually want to retire this imprecise language in favour of a set of more precise 
successors.
What are the core commitments of the ‘single natural kind’ view? In a 
series of papers, Nicholas Shea and Tim Bayne provide a good account.12 The 
idea is not that we can ﬁnd a precise set of essential properties (or necessary 
and suﬃcient conditions) for consciousness, in the way that chemists have 
uncovered the essential properties of chemical elements. The worlds of biol-
ogy and psychology tend to be too messy to allow for necessary and suﬃcient 
conditions, and we should expect consciousness to be no exception. The 
thought is rather that phenomenal consciousness will turn out to be a neuro-
bio logic al/cognitive natural kind that causally explains a large and diverse 
cluster of other properties and so has an important and distinctive causal role 
in the overall functioning of the brain.
Most scientiﬁc theories currently on the market are instances of this gen-
eral idea, because they hold that phenomenal consciousness is a distinctive 
kind of computation: perhaps recurrent processing,13 global broadcast,14 
11 See Chalmers (2010, ch. 5), for one in5uential way of carving up the space.
12 Shea and Bayne (2010); Shea (2011); Bayne and Shea (2020). See Whiteley (2022) for sympa-
thetic discussion and Phillips (2018) and Taylor (2023) for criticism.
13 Lamme (2010, 2022).
14 Baars (1988); Dehaene and Changeux (2011); Mashour et al. (2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
