H)F ,:N)G%.N% ,+ %HE NE)()G%EOJ 
5M5
of reasonable disagreement, yet their implications for the edge of sentience 
are starkly diﬀerent. The two- system model implies that many of the markers 
o7en taken to indicate valenced experience in humans, such as breaking out 
in a sweat when shown a frightening stimulus, are not really caused by con-
scious feelings at all. Although they involve the central nervous system, they 
are nonetheless more akin to withdrawing one’s hand from a hot stove than 
we have tended to think. They may still work as signs of valenced experience 
in humans, but only by correlating with it non- causally, just as reﬂex with-
drawal of one’s hand correlates non- causally with feeling pain (so that, if we 
see someone withdraw their hand from a hot stove, we are not surprised if 
they later report pain, despite the absence of a causal relationship).
This raises the possibility that many of the behavioural responses o7en 
interpreted as signs of conscious feelings in other animals— such as freeze 
responses in mice, the target of much of LeDoux’s early experimental work— 
are, likewise, not really caused by conscious feelings, but rather by homo-
logues of our own unconscious circuits.82 These responses may still correlate 
non- causally with valenced experience, just as they do in us. But, in the 
absence of a causal relationship, these signs do not provide an adequate basis 
for inferring (by IBE) that homologues of our own conscious processes are 
present in the animal, in cases where this is in doubt.
For LeDoux, whose focus throughout his career has been the case of fear, it 
is a major error to simply assume that amygdala activity in animals, leading to 
a defensive response, always involves a conscious feeling of fear. Such an 
assumption may sound harmless and precautionary, but it tends to lead, LeDoux 
suggests, to the seriously mistaken assumption that we can develop psychiatric 
therapies that work in humans by studying the defensive responses of animals. 
Panksepp o7en talked up the potential for animal research of this kind to lead to 
new psychiatric therapies, so LeDoux is not attacking a straw man here.
The two- system model dovetails with the orthodox interpretation of blind-
sight, in so far as it involves positing a consciousness- involving cortical path-
way and a second, subcortical pathway that is wholly unconscious. It meshes 
particularly well with higher- order theories of sensory consciousness, accord-
ing to which conscious sensory experiences involve the re- representation in 
prefrontal cortex of content originally processed in specialized sensory areas 
such as the primary visual cortex.88
82 Paul et al. (2020).
88 R.DBrown et al. (2019). This is, at least, the traditional type of higher- order theory. A new type, 
developed by Lau (2022), does not involve re- representation but the mere tagging of ﬁrst- order repre-
sentations as reliable representations of the world right now, internally generated, or noise.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
