,OG1)6/ 8H91N. /21H78,.) 
2CK
imply the total abolition of neural activity) but also consistent with some 
form of continuing experience.1A So, we are not in a position to be sure that 
current electrical stunning methods produce total unconsciousness.
What to do, given the current state of the evidence? In my view, our uncer-
tainty makes it proportionate to require more than one precaution. Those 
slaughtering decapods should not only use stunning techniques that are 
properly calibrated to the species, size, developmental stage, and stage of 
moult of the animals. In addition, they should also use the quickest available 
slaughter methods and aim for rapid mechanical destruction of the brain. 
The procedure should not be ‘stun electrically then boil’ but rather ‘stun elec-
trically, kill quickly with a mechanical method, then boil’.
The best mechanical method depends on the species. Detailed guidelines 
are available online.1B In brief, a crab can be killed reasonably quickly by a 
method called double spiking, and lobsters can be killed reasonably quickly 
by cutting along the chain of ganglia with a sharp knife, starting at the head. 
These are specialist techniques that require training. Even these methods still 
take up to ten seconds, highlighting the value of prior stunning, and suggest-
ing there is a need for quicker methods to be developed and made widely 
available. With some stunners, it is possible to leave the animal in the stunner 
until it is dead. But this may take longer to destroy the brain than a mech an-
ic al method, depending on the parameters and the species.
Is freezing an alternative? Home freezers are not cold enough to kill an 
animal quickly. Decapods in home freezers take more than one hour to die, 
and crabs autotomize (shed limbs) during freezing.1D My point here is not 
that autotomy is a good marker of sentience as such (it is not) but rather that, 
in an animal already considered a sentience candidate on other grounds, 
autotomy is a sign of distress. This does not rule out the possibility that very 
rapid freezing could form part of an acceptable slaughter method.
With vertebrates, it is a generally accepted principle that humane slaughter 
requires training. In England, a certiﬁcate of competence is needed to slaugh-
ter animals in slaughterhouses. To get the certiﬁcate, one must undertake a 
three- month training programme with an accredited provider. This is a basic 
step towards adequate oversight and regulation, and we should take similar 
steps regarding decapod crustaceans. It is currently possible to order a live 
lobster online, have it delivered to your home, and kill it in any way you like, 
with no framework to ensure that the animals are slaughtered competently by 
1A Alkire et al. (2008).
1B RSPCA Australia (2016).
1D Roth and Øines (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
