)I 
ET,-./ 012 3E4-5-61
constraint, as Carruthers admits. Our imagined CEO could satisfy it by 
respectfully listening to animal advocates and taking their feelings into 
account, even if he gives those feelings very little weight and makes all the 
same decisions. Ultimately, Carruthers regards concern for non- human sen-
tient life as a distraction that will draw resources away from attempts to help 
other humans in need:
Concern with animal welfare, while expressive of states of character that are 
admirable, is an irrelevance to be opposed rather than encouraged. Our 
response to animal lovers should not be ‘if it upsets you, don’t think about 
it’, but rather ‘If it upsets you, think about something more important’.2D
He concludes that ‘we should wish to roll back the tide of current popular 
concern with animal welfare’.21
I said earlier that some views— such as setting ourselves the goal of maxi-
mizing suﬀering— are too far away from our intuitive grasp of what morality 
involves to merit serious consideration. I cannot deny there is a temptation to 
say the same about the indirect duty view, but I think that would be a mistake. 
The zone of reasonable disagreement is intended to include deep value con-
9icts, such as the con9ict that plainly exists between me and Carruthers (or, 
at least, his views in the 1990s). The boundary of the zone is to be drawn 
between, on the one hand, ethical outlooks that involve responding to  reasons 
and evidence in a way that makes debate possible and, on the other hand, 
outlooks that derail the process of reaching agreement by being inherently 
dogmatic, baseless, or malevolent. We need to make room for good- faith 
attempts to defend aspects of the status quo, including very controversial 
practices. We will grapple more with these diﬃculties in Chapter 6.
4.5 Abrahamic Religions and the Stewardship Tradition
This is not the place for an exhaustive survey of religious perspectives on sen-
tience. I do, however, want to challenge an assumption that there is a deep 
opposition between religious and sentientist outlooks. There are tensions, 
and they are serious, but I think they are not so deep as to preclude broad 
2D Carruthers (1992, p. 168).
21 Carruthers (1992, p. 169). I doubt Carruthers still holds this view (based on personal cor re-
spond ence) but he has not published anything that directly supersedes it.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
