0J30,0K-. 3E4-5-61/ 012 T,E /TE;032/,-L T302-T-61 
)M
consensus on many issues. A detailed survey is not needed to make this point, 
but engagement with at least some of the world’s major religions is needed.22
One source of tension is that religions sometimes attach great value to 
forms of human life that are not realistic candidates for sentience, such as fer-
tilized zygotes, simply because they are human. We will consider these points 
of disagreement in Chapter 10. Another is that the Abrahamic religions 
(Judaism, Christianity, Islam) aﬀord an exalted status to humanity that can 
make it seem as though non- human forms of sentience count for little. That 
source of tension is real but sometimes exaggerated. Grounds can be found 
within such religions for respecting non- human sentient beings. Of course, 
no religion has settled answers to questions about sentience in organoids or 
AI, but all have faced questions about sentience in other animals, and it is in 
this context that reasons for respecting sentience can be identiﬁed.
In Christianity, God, in Genesis, gives humanity ‘dominion over the ﬁsh of 
the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, 
and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth’. The term ‘domin-
ion’ is perhaps most naturally read as permitting unequivocal domination. 
But critics have argued that dominion is a poor translation of the original 
Hebrew term rādâ.27 The term also describes the relationship between God 
and humanity, and in that context suggests a relationship akin to the relation 
between shepherd and 9ock: a relation of stewardship. To the extent that 
intensive farming methods ofen exclude true stewardship, replacing it with 
ruthless exploitation, there is room for a Christian critique of those methods.
Some Christian theologians have looked for ways to move beyond stew-
ardship in the direction of a more robust defence of animal rights. Andrew 
Linzey has defended a view on which ‘animal rights’ are best interpreted as 
deriving from God’s right to have His creations treated with the loving attitude 
He wishes them to be aﬀorded. On Linzey’s view, the stewardship tradition 
underplays the extent of those rights, which extend to the right to not have 
their 9esh eaten unnecessarily. Unusually, Linzey regards the incarnation of 
Jesus Christ as evidence that God loves embodiment in 9esh. It is this idea of 
the value of ‘Spirit- ﬁlled creatures, composed of 9esh and blood’, not sentience, 
that plays a fundamental role in Linzey’s theory.28 Sentience correlates with 
this property, but imperfectly so, and when they come apart (think here about 
22 Many perspectives will not be covered, including ShintN, Daoism, Muism, Caodeism, BahOʾP, 
and Confucianism. To be clear, this is not intended to suggest that there is anything unreasonable 
about these perspectives: they are part of the zone of reasonable disagreement but not a part I can 
survey in detail.
27 Preece and Fraser (2000).
28 Linzey (1987/2016, p. 80).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
