2
The Concept of Sentience
2.1 Sentience and Consciousness
The issues that matter most at the edge of sentience are scienti!c, meta phys ic al, 
ethical, and political, not semantic. Yet we do need a working de!nition for 
the purposes of building up a framework. This chapter puts a de!nition 
on the table: sentience as the capacity for valenced experience. It then explores 
the elements of this de!nition.
The term ‘sentience’ in English comes from the Latin ‘sentire’, literally ‘to 
feel’. It is used in diﬀerent ways in diﬀerent contexts, with the idea of ‘feeling’ 
providing a loose common thread. We saw in Chapter 1 that, sometimes, 
people use it to mean nothing more than ‘responsiveness to sensory stimuli 
due to adaptive internal processes’. I strongly recommend against using the 
term in this way, because it creates a large gap with how the term has come to be 
used in bioethics, animal ethics, animal law, and the science of animal welfare.
More commonly, sentience is taken to imply a capacity for conscious 
ex peri ence. But now we run into another conceptual thicket, because the 
term ‘consciousness’ is also used in various ways in diﬀerent contexts. Herbert 
Feigl, writing in the middle of the twentieth century, suggested that there are 
three deeply puzzling features of the mind- body relationship: sentience, sapi-
ence, and sel!ood. Unhelpfully, the ordinary term ‘consciousness’ can gesture 
towards any of the three, and sometimes to the package of all three together, 
leading to no end of confusion.1
Sentience, our topic, concerns what Feigl called ‘raw feels’ or qualities. The 
term ‘raw feels’ is controversial, for it connotes, I think misleadingly, that sen-
tience is ‘unprocessed’ rather than a product of complex processing. ‘Qualities’ 
is not ideal either, because people sometimes understand it as positing 
a  mysterious, special type of property, distinct from any functional or neuro-
biological property of the brain (it should not be read as implying this). 
1 Feigl (1958/1967, 1971, 1975).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
