2))P,N3 1EY)N/ %HE :.::.2,.N (.+E 
5MK
displayed on a computer screen by moving their head in or out of an infrared 
light beam. The precise nature of the report depended on a second cue, dis-
played a7er the near- threshold cue, in order to ensure that the neural record-
ings were capturing signatures of the stimulus being seen, and not just 
signatures of an action being prepared. Remarkable as this is, it leads to a 
possible problem: when a report- like protocol is trained into animals over so 
many trials, its link to consciousness becomes more questionable, since a 
human could probably be trained in a similar way to ‘report’ an unconscious 
prime.52 Even so, the study undoubtedly makes a strong case for further 
investigation of the NCL.
This type of work, however, is still exceptionally rare. It should, in my view, 
be a priority for consciousness science to ﬁnd ways of dissociating putatively 
conscious and unconscious processing in a much wider range of animals, 
including invertebrate animals.58 We will not be able to use the exact same 
techniques we use in primates, but it would be premature to conclude that 
there are no ways to adapt these techniques for other animals.5; Where we do 
ﬁnd dissociations between two signiﬁcantly diﬀerent kinds of processing, one 
potentially conscious and the other unconscious, we will be able to use this 
information to develop better theories of consciousness than we have cur-
rently. We will be in a much better position to disentangle the truly funda-
mental diﬀerences between these two kinds of processing from contingent 
aspects of the way the diﬀerence is implemented in mammals.
In the meantime, we must face up to the fact that the evidential picture, 
once we look beyond the mammals, is not as rich as we would like it to be. 
For the most part, we have a substantial amount of behavioural evidence 
(some of which will be described in later chapters), plus evidence of integra-
tive brain regions (such as the pallium in birds, the optic tectum in ﬁshes, the 
PAG in all vertebrates, the vertical lobe in cephalopod molluscs, the hemiel-
lipsoid bodies in decapod crustaceans, and the central complex and mush-
room bodies in insects), with limited understanding of the precise brain 
mechanisms producing the behaviours we are seeing, outside of a small number 
of model organisms. A lot of the time, the behaviours we see would be taken 
as clear evidence of experiences of certain kinds (such as pain) when observed 
in a mammal (some evidence of this type will be considered in Part IV). 
52 Crump and Birch (2022); van Gaal et al. (2008, 2009, 2010).
58 Birch (2022c).
5; For example, a study by Grover et al. (2022) creatively adapted for Drosophila fruit ﬂies an 
experimental strategy used for humans and rabbits by Clark and Squire (1998) to show that, in 
Drosophila as in mammals, trace and delay conditioning are supported by diﬀerent brain mech an-
isms (see also Giurfa and Macri 2022).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
