54I 
I(VO2VI() TH, 13B2I?
panel to make a diﬃcult trade- o; between two very di;erent types of harm, 
they will naturally use their own values to do the weighing. But if the panel is 
well constructed (and more on this in Chapter 8), these values will be repre-
sentative of the values of society as a whole. The hope and promise of a citi-
zens’ panel is that the resulting trade- o; will reﬂect the decision the whole of 
society would have reached, had every member of society been presented 
with relevant information and given time to deliberate with others.
7.3 Three Alternatives
Citizens panels and assemblies o;er one way to avoid the tyranny of expert 
values, but is this the only way? Let us consider three alternatives.
Elected Representatives
Should the task of assessing proportionality not fall to our elected representa-
tives? I agree that elected representatives have an essential role. Some88 have 
suggested that citizens’ panels be given autonomous legislative authority— the 
power to make laws— but this is not what I am proposing here, and I think it 
would be a mistake. That power is best le9 in the hands of elected representa-
tives. Elected assemblies provide a di;erent kind of representation: what 
Philip Pettit has called responsive representation, where representatives are 
accountable to an electorate and have incentives to respond to their concerns. 
Responsive representation is well suited in theory to the task of making laws, 
for all its many problems in practice.8: Accordingly, it should fall to elected 
representatives to implement, amend, or overturn the recommendations of a 
citizens’ panel on any particular issue. My proposal is that a framework of 
citizens’ panels should run in parallel to the normal framework of representa-
tive democracy, providing it with input on questions of proportionality.
Why, then, are the panels needed at all? As Pettit has argued, when we 
wantJto move an issue at least partly outside the scope of party politics, but 
want to do this in a way that does not lead to technocracy, they provide a 
mechanism through which this can be achieved. He calls this ‘depoliticization’.8A 
I would sooner call it ‘departisanization’, since discussions among panels of 
88 Guerrero (2014); Landemore (2020).
8: Pettit (2010, 2012); Waldron (2016).
8A Pettit (2004, 2012).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
