T() 2)3)E7,T 6:73) /F F9,:T+/,73 /287,+R7T+/, 
6;
the severing of their corpus callosum, a structure linking the two hemispheres 
of the cerebrum. Due to the wiring of the visual pathways, the le4- hand side 
of the visual ﬁeld sends information to the right hemisphere and vice versa. In 
some split- brain patients, information presented to one half of the visual ﬁeld 
is unavailable to guide actions controlled by the other. Thomas Nagel and 
Michael Lockwood took behavioural disunity as a challenge to the assump-
tion that consciousness must always be uniﬁed.HP In later discussions, Hurley 
and Bayne sought to reconcile the data with the unity of consciousness.H1
If we grant that some form of embodiment and agency is a necessary con-
dition for conscious experience, the next question is whether virtual embodi-
ment and agency, of which a very simple form already exists in ‘DishBrain’, 
might be enough. We cannot rule out that it is. Indeed, I am doubtful there is 
anything real agency and embodiment provide that a suﬃciently rich virtual 
environment could not also provide. And so, once again, the zone of rea son-
able disagreement along this axis is quite wide. Views on which real agency 
and embodiment are required are reasonable, but so are views on which vir-
tual forms are enough, as are views on which neither is required in any form.
3.6 The Relevant Scale of Functional Organization
Could an AI system achieve sentience? Could a robot? These questions are 
o4en said to turn on the ‘substrate neutrality’ or ‘substrate sensitivity’ of sen-
tience. In fact, I have come to see this as an oversimpliﬁed way of framing the 
issue. However, I will discuss it in this language ﬁrst— before explaining why I 
have come to see this as too simplistic.
According to substrate neutrality, sentience does not depend on the ma ter-
ial substrate in which a system is realized, only on the functional organization 
of that substrate. Biology is optional. The functional architecture of the 
human brain, realized in a di!erent medium, such as a future supercomputer, 
would still be suﬃcient for sentience. Substrate sensitivity, by contrast, says 
the nature of the material substrate does matter.
Framed like this, is there any evidence that could settle the issue? Susan 
Schneider has made a proposal for how the issue could eventually be 
resolved.H2 It relies on the conjecture that neural implants will one day be 
HP Nagel (1971); Lockwood (1989).
H1 Bayne (2010); Hurley (1998). Schechter (2018) is a good entry point to this debate.
H2 Schneider (2019, 2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
