30K 
AGAI()T C,-./AC0(C1
The decoupling between sentience and intelligence could also occur in the 
other direction: there may be systems that are highly intelligent in quite ver-
satile ways (e.g. in their linguistic abilities) without being candidates for sen-
tience.3; LLMs already seem to be heading in that direction. This too carries 
ethical risks, but of a diﬀerent kind. I fear people will be too willing to at tri-
bute sentience to these systems because of their impressive mimicry of human 
language, potentially drawing away attention and resources from genuine 
sentience candidates.
Proposal 22. Sentience is not intelligence (II). We should be aware of the 
possibility of a substantial decoupling between intelligence and sentience 
in the AI domain. Precautions to manage risks of suﬀering should be 
driven by markers of sentience, not markers of intelligence. For example, 
emulations of animal brains could achieve sentience without necessarily 
displaying impressive intelligence.
15.3 Sources of Risk 2: Artiﬁcial Evolution
Computer simulations of evolution by natural selection were around in the 
1980s and were popularized by Richard Dawkins in The Blind Watchmaker 
(1986/2006). They have become a standard part of the evolutionary biolo-
gist’s toolkit— and they are not currently generating sentience candidates. 
Many do not simulate individual organisms at all, instead simulating popula-
tion frequencies of alleles. In those cases where individual organisms are 
simulated, they tend to be functionally extremely limited.
To give an indicative example, one recent study involved a virtual popula-
tion of ‘simulated robots’ playing a coordination game, evolving novel strat-
egies to coordinate with each other.37 Each simulated robot was controlled by 
an arti2cial neural network with 410 neurons. However, the connection 
weights, while free to evolve across generations, were 2xed within the lifetime 
of each agent. In other words, there was no individual- level learning in the 
model. So, we are still looking at an arti2cial agent much simpler than even 
C. elegans in important respects.
3; Seth (2021).
37 Bernard et al. (2020). Fields (2021) has discussed the philosophical foundations of this ‘evolu-
tionary robotics’ programme.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
