%KK 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
the face of immense uncertainty, results in the patient losing any chance to 
defy that prognosis.42 A Canadian study found evidence that 70.2 per cent of 
deaths in neurointensive care units following brain injury involved inten-
tional withdrawal of treatment, with around half of these deaths occurring in 
the 8rst three days aAer the injury.49 These patients were not given the chance 
to stabilize into any state, so we cannot say with any con8dence what state 
they would have attained and whether they would have valued it. Johnson’s 
verdict is stark: ‘people who might have survived to have good and 7ourish-
ing lives will die avoidable deaths.’44 She advocates for an approach based on 
watching and waiting, so that uncertainty about the patient’s prognosis can 
be at least somewhat reduced by the time decisions about treatment with-
drawal are made.
The overall picture is one in which patients, families, and clinicians are 
boxed in by a legal framework inadequately sensitive to the facts on the 
ground. This is true even in the UK, where the issues have been debated for 
several decades and the framework is relatively nuanced by international 
standards. In the UK, lawmakers have long evaded the issue, allowing the key 
principles to be thrashed out through case law. I 8nd it entirely under stand-
able that legislators do not want to decriminalize or legalize a method of end-
ing life. They do not want such an issue to become part of the battleground of 
party politics. That is fair enough, but we also cannot carry on as we are.
This is just the type of situation in which convening a citizens’ assembly 
and implementing its recommendations in law could help legislators break 
out of the box. If the question of proportionality were put to a citizens’ panel, 
I think it very likely that the panel would agree about the need to make avail-
able a faster method of ending life for cases in which everyone on the 
decision- making team— relatives and clinicians— all agree that this would be 
in the patient’s best interests. This would be a proportionate measure to man-
age a risk of su!ering. The case is not complicated; it does not require special-
ist knowledge to grasp. The testimony of patients’ families makes the case.
In jurisdictions where CANH withdrawal is legal, the change to policy 
could be quite simple. It could take the form of a guarantee that quali8ed 
neuropalliative care specialists will not be prosecuted or punished in any 
other way for administering sedatives and analgesics during a process of 
CANH withdrawal, regardless of the dose used and the outcome for the 
patient. The right dose could then be leA to their clinical judgement, based on 
42 Johnson (2022).
49 Turgeon et al. (2011).
44 Johnson (2022, p. 86).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
