%M4 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
be informed suggests we must also make room for decisions to be revisited in 
light of new evidence. They should be ‘inclusive’ in the sense that all interests 
at stake in the process should be appropriately represented. For example, a pro-
cess that may result in new animal welfare regulations for a particular indus-
try should involve representatives of that industry. At the same time, the 
interests of the aﬀected animals should be appropriately represented, a role 
that typically falls to animal welfare experts or organizations. And they should 
be ‘democratic’ in the sense that the process should be integrated with demo-
crat ic mechanisms that confer legitimacy on policy decisions. There are diﬀer-
ent ways this could be done, and I will revisit that issue in the next chapter. 
Real- world cases, such as the debates around the UK’s Animal Welfare 
(Sentience) Act 2022, oﬀer examples on which we can try to improve.
This leads to my third and ﬁnal framework principle:
Framework Principle 3. Assessments of proportionality should be informed, 
democratic, and inclusive. To reach decisions, we should use informed and 
inclusive democratic processes. These decisions should be revisited peri-
od ic al ly and whenever signiﬁcant new evidence emerges.
There is a lot more to be said on the issue of what an informed and inclusive 
democratic process for reaching assessments of proportionality might look 
like. That task will be taken up in the next two chapters. But before we move 
on, I must address a diﬀerent question: how do these framework principles 
relate to ‘the precautionary principle’?
6.6 Relation to Other Precautionary Ideas
Daniel Steel, in a wide- ranging analysis of the foundations of precautionary 
thinking, has argued that there is no single ‘precautionary principle’ as such, 
but rather many diﬀerent precautionary principles for diﬀerent policy areas 
and problems.;G What unites them is a shared commitment to a broad norm 
for policy- making that Steel calls the ‘meta- precautionary principle’: the 
norm that we should never allow scientiﬁc uncertainty to lead to policy- 
making paralysis. We should not let problems fester for decades while we wait 
;G Steel (2015).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
