MNA 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
What to do in this situation? My proposal is that we take the earliest 
evidence- based estimate as the point at which discussions about proportional-
ity are warranted. This may or may not be where sentience begins in reality, 
but it is where sentience candidature begins. An ‘evidence- based estimate’ is 
one that ﬂows from a credible, evidence- based theoretical perspective com-
patible with the scientiﬁc meta- consensus (Chapter 6). The earliest rea son-
able estimate I have come across in the existing literature is Derbyshire and 
Bockmann’s estimate of the beginning of the second trimester.
Proposal 8. Human sentience candidature begins early. Human fetuses are 
sentience candidates from the beginning of the second trimester. This line 
may move as new evidence emerges, but it should always track the earliest 
scientiﬁcally credible, evidence- based estimate.
10.4 Taking a Precautionary Stance towards Fetuses
What sort of precautions may be proportionate? Before returning to the case 
of abortion, which presents unique diJculties, let us consider therapeutic 
interventions on a fetus. One might intuitively suppose that human fetuses 
are never operated on directly, but in fact a signiﬁcant number of open mid- 
gestation fetal surgeries have been developed for repairing various kinds of 
congenital defect. For example, the neural tube defect MMC (myelomenin-
gocele) can be treated with fetal surgery.44
Where fetal surgery is possible, the direct intramuscular injection of anaes-
thetics and analgesics to the fetus is usually also possible, and should always 
be considered.45 Speciﬁc treatment decisions in these cases need to be made 
by expert anaesthesiologists, in discussion with surgeons and with the 
mother. We cannot say, in general, what the right call will be. Yet wider public 
debate about the issue is still important, as the 1980s debate around neonatal 
pain demonstrated. Even though speciﬁc decisions call for expert judgement, 
the general norms that shape those expert judgements can and should be mat-
ters of public discussion and ethical reﬂection.
As anaesthesiologists Monica Hoagland and Debnath Chatterjee have 
emphasized, the case for administering anaesthesia to fetuses during thera-
peutic procedures does not need to rest on conjectures about the 
44 Hoagland and Chatterjee (2017).
45 Bellieni (2021); Hoagland and Chatterjee (2017).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
