49 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
a person with blindsight who, despite being fully blind across the whole visual 
ﬁeld according to their own reports, ‘can successfully navigate down the 
extent of a long corridor in which various barriers were placed . . . skillfully 
avoiding and turning around the blockages’.;
Taken at face value, blindsight presents an extraordinary opportunity to 
compare conscious and unconscious processing of the same visual stimulus 
in the same subject. Present the stimulus to the blind ﬁeld, and it will register 
without being reported. Present it to a non- blind part of the visual ﬁeld and it 
will be consciously seen. This allows us to ask: what advantages does con-
scious processing of a stimulus confer? What does it enable or facilitate? It 
seemed reasonable to hope, when blindsight was discovered, that it would 
make it possible to pin down the functions of conscious visual experience 
and the brain mechanisms responsible for those functions.
We now have an impressively detailed picture of the pathways involved in 
blindsight, yet this picture has not led to any consensus around the function 
or neural basis of conscious vision. The basic di6culty is that the putatively 
unconscious visual pathways at work in blindsight diﬀer in lots of ways from 
those involved in normal conscious vision. In blindsight, visual information 
bypasses the visual areas at the back of the cortex, instead typically ﬂowing 
from the optic tract to the superior colliculus (in the midbrain) and the pulvi-
nar (in the thalamus), before eventually reaching the amygdala and middle 
temporal gyrus.5
The important point is that blindsight does not simply ‘switch oﬀ con-
sciousness’ in the blind ﬁeld, leaving all else the same. Blindsight is a pro-
foundly diﬀerent mechanism. So, when we ﬁnd diﬀerences in function and 
neural activation between normal conscious vision and blindsight, we cannot 
tell which diﬀerences are due to the involvement (or not) of consciousness 
speciﬁcally, and which diﬀerences are due to other diﬀerences between the 
pathways, such as the information reaching (or not reaching) other mech an-
isms that are not part of the basis of consciousness at all.
As a result, the blindsight data can be reconciled with a wide variety of dif-
ferent theoretical perspectives. Most obviously, the data are compatible with 
theories on which the visual areas at the back of the cortex (directly damaged 
in blindsight) are a constituent part of the neural basis of visual experience.6 
However, they are also compatible with theories on which mechanisms in the 
; de Gelder et al. (2008, p. R1128).
5 Ajina and Bridge (2017).
6 Brogaard (2011); Lamme (2001); Pascual- Leone and Walsh (2001); Silvanto et al. (2005); Tong 
(2003).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
