2HE ,0)-E (F ,E05.32.C /(33.B.5.2.E3 
%K%
challenges facing any view that sees both the neocortex and the midbrain as 
unimportant to sentience, or any view that regards a functional primate 
neocortex as insu8cient.
This may sound like it does not exclude very much, but it does. Consider, 
for example, the cerebellum. This is part of the hindbrain, at the very back 
and base of the brain, and it contains more neurons than any other brain 
region, even the cortex. There are 69 billion neurons in your cerebellum, 
compared with a mere 16 billion in the cortex.:B If one were trying to guess 
the ‘seat of consciousness’ in the brain using nothing but neuron counts, one 
would probably guess the cerebellum— and be completely wrong. There is no 
evidence for a role for the cerebellum in generating conscious experience and 
strong evidence against. The cerebellum has important roles in motor control 
and sensorimotor integration, and appears to be crucially involved in model-
ling the expected sensory consequences of our actions and registering predic-
tion errors.:C These computations could have turned out to be essential to 
sustaining a conscious state, but they turn out not to be, as a matter of em pir-
ic al fact. Being born without a cerebellum (complete primary cerebellar 
agenesis) leads to motor control problems but turns out to be compatible 
with otherwise normal cognitive development.:D
So, the evidence does not warrant attaching signiﬁcant probability to a 
hindbrain- centric theory of sentience, or a theory that blithely predicts that sen-
tience will be tied to the brain region with the most neurons, with no con sid er-
ation of what the neurons are doing. One cannot pluck theories out of thin air, 
without supporting evidence, and expect them to be taken seriously when 
practical questions are at stake. There are too many possible- but- very- low- 
probability theories, and their practical implications are so diverse that they are 
apt to derail discussion if we admit them to the table. In practical contexts, we 
need to maintain a focus on credible theories that have amassed enough evidence 
in their favour to merit serious discussion of their practical implications.
For another example, this time from the other end of the axis, consider a 
theory that ties sentience to natural language. There are credible theories, 
such as Edmund Rolls’s ‘higher- order syntactic thought’ theory, that tie con-
scious experience to quite sophisticated kinds of thought, suggesting a nar-
row distribution of sentience in the animal kingdom.:E Yet even Rolls stops 
short of proposing that natural language is required for the relevant type of 
thought, allowing that a ‘language of thought’ might also be su8cient.:G This 
is a wise move, because we have clear evidence that linguistic abilities are not 
:B Herculano- Houzel (2009).
:C Arikan et al. (2019); Johnson et al. (2019).
:D Yu et al. (2015).
:E Rolls (2014).
:G On the idea of a language of thought and its history, see Quilty- Dunn et al. (2023); Rescorla (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
