Stepping Back
In the woods near my home a tiny ﬂy, about the size of Drosophila, landed on 
the middle ﬁnger of my lef hand. I usually blow ﬂies away. This time, this 
book weighing on my mind, I let the ﬂy sit there. Like the octopus in My 
Octopus Teacher, the ﬂy seemed oddly curious about my skin, exploring the 
strange textures and odours, raising and lowering its limbs. I walked with 
them for twenty minutes or so.
The longer you watch a ﬂy, the easier it becomes to see them for what they 
are: an exploratory, unpredictable, inscrutable creature with a complex brain. 
A false perception of the ﬂy as a nondescript nuisance gives way to something 
more accurate, more attuned to reality. You think at ﬁrst that a being of that 
size could not be as complex or interesting as a dog or an octopus. Looking 
closely makes you think again.
I am enough of an optimist about human ingenuity to ﬁnd it likely we will 
one day build systems as capable and complex as ﬂies. We will create new 
sentience candidates. Will we use them or co- exist with them? The pressure 
to let instrumental relations dominate will be overwhelming. Perhaps the 
only way to avoid that temptation is to never attempt to build such beings in 
the ﬁrst place. But there may be a diﬀerent way: one that involves all of us 
reﬂecting intensely and honestly on how we might change our orientation 
towards sentient life to become more about co- existence than use. Maybe 
then, when we do work out how to create new forms of sentience, we will be 
ready.
This book has been about action, decision, policy: about how we can face 
up to real- life dilemmas at the edge of sentience and handle them appropri-
ately. Some of these dilemmas are heading towards us at alarming speed. 
Some are already here. Some have always been with us. I hope the framework 
and set of proposals I have put forward (summarized at the beginning of the 
book) provide a platform for further debate about these issues. We need to 
decide what to do in these cases, and we need to do it calmly, despite the 
urgency of the problems. We need to think through our value conﬂicts, listen 
to experts, stakeholders, and advocates, look for points of consensus and 
meta- consensus, and design precautions that are permissible in principle, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
