PN6/1, 6/5 U/.C2NNUN67 4706/.,?, 
2GM
suFcient for sentience in mammals. So, a potential neural substrate for sen-
tience in invertebrates has been identi:ed. But there are no such mechanisms 
in plants. No brain, no brainstem, no midbrain, and nothing analogous to 
these. Again, there is an implicit challenge for ‘plant sentience’ researchers: 
:nd a plausible substrate comparable to the central complex of insects or the 
vertical lobe of cephalopods.
In short, it is fair to speculate about the idea of plant sentience in the sem-
inar room, but it would be a mistake to regard this as an idea with empirical 
support. We should not draw false equivalences between plants and inverte-
brates. The idea of such an equivalence does not survive a close encounter 
with the evidence from cephalopods, decapod crustaceans, or insects, where 
a realistic possibility of sentience has been established by empirical studies.
Much the same goes for unicellular organisms.67 One can speculate, but it 
is crucial to present this as a speculation, not a realistic possibility supported 
by empirical evidence. In a commentary on our pain criteria, Arthur Reber, 
Frantisek BaluOka, and William Miller claimed that ‘if references to neural 
traits and neurotransmitters are deleted and “animal” is replaced by “organism”, 
prokaryotes :t the criteria very nicely’.6B They take their earlier work to 
support this claim, but this work has not made a convincing case. Two 
ex amples may explain why. First, in a 2021 review, the only data Reber and 
BaluOka cited in support of unicellular organisms performing avoidance 
learning were Herbert Jennings’s anecdotal observations, in the early 1900s, 
of the ciliate Stentor roeseli.6C Replicating these observations in experiments 
that meet modern scienti:c standards is important, if such bold claims are to 
be based on them.7D Even if there were high- quality evidence of avoidance 
learning in ciliates (which are eukaryotes), it would be quite a stretch to gen-
eralize to prokaryotes such as bacteria. Second, in a section called ‘decision 
making’, Reber and BaluOka cite a magazine article reporting a study of sto-
chastic gene expression in E. coli.71 The author playfully suggested that E. coli 
have free will, clearly not using the term in anything like its philosophical 
sense. Reber and BaluOka cited this article as evidence that E. coli literally has 
free will, and this the only paper they cite under the heading of ‘decision mak-
ing’. In short, Reber and colleagues are mistaken to think their speculations 
rise to the level of realistic possibilities or command empirical support.
To sum up the overall message of the last two chapters, I see the current 
situation like this:
67 This paragraph draws on my contributions to Crump et al. (2022a).
6B Reber et al. (2022).
6C Reber and BaluOka (2021); Jennings (1906).
7D I discuss the Stentor evidence in more detail in Birch (2017b).
71 Kondev (2014).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
