,OG1)6/ 8H91N. /21H78,.) 
2CM
that ‘insect- killing methods that would reduce suﬀering include freezing or 
instantaneous techniques such as shredding’.;1 Unfortunately, freezing, when 
not rapid, raises the same issues for insects as it does for crabs and lobsters. 
Shredding at least allows rapid mechanical destruction of the brain, which 
may be the best that can be achieved given our current state of knowledge.;;
In sum, even in our current state of great uncertainty, we can take action 
now against extreme slaughter methods, and make sure that they are ruled 
out by the codes of good practice that we should in any case be developing as 
a matter of urgency.
Proposal 21. Towards humane slaughter. When an animal is a sentience 
candidate, it is proportionate to ban slaughter methods that needlessly risk 
extending and intensifying the suﬀering associated with dying, such as 
boiling animals alive without prior stunning.
We have not yet covered the issue of pesticides, which kill vast and very diﬃ-
cult to estimate numbers of insects,;3 o4en in protracted ways. There has 
been much debate about the ecological consequences of pesticides, and their 
possible link to the decline of wild bee populations, but issues of welfare and 
humane treatment are usually forgotten in these discussions. They give us a 
further reason to worry about pesticides. Unfortunately, there is a frustrating 
lack of evidence regarding which pesticides are more humane and why— the 
issue is simply never taken into account at all, as part of a general neglect of 
the whole area of insect welfare. A detailed report on the issue by H. J. B. Howe 
revealed huge evidence gaps.;?
Entomologist Meghan Barrett recently founded an Insect Welfare Research 
Society;5 aimed at remedying some of the most serious gaps in the evidence. 
I  was happy to join the Society’s advisory board— and I have, with Lars 
Chittka, just begun a project that aims to ﬁnd out more about the potential 
welfare needs of two of the most widely farmed insects, crickets and black 
soldier ﬂy larvae.
;1 van Huis et al. (2013, p. 65).
;; Rowe (2020) arrives at the same conclusion.
;3 Howe (2019) estimates a number on the order of 100 trillion insects on insecticide- treated land 
in the US at any one time, based on an estimate of 7,700 insects per square metre of treated land.
;? Howe (2019).
;5 https://www.insectwelfare.com/.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
