%LM 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
Proposal 5. The need for more humane options. Methods of hastening 
death other than through withdrawal of clinically assisted nutrition and 
hydration (CANH) are needed. At minimum, clinicians should not face 
any risk of punishment for administering large doses of sedatives or 
analgesics aAer a decision to withdraw CANH has been made.
Proposal 6. Waiting for more information. If a humane method of 
hastening death becomes available, there will be no strong rationale for 
withdrawing life- sustaining treatment within days aAer injury, before the 
patient’s condition has stabilized. Given the great uncertainty about 
prospects for recovery at this stage, the default approach should be to delay 
the decision until the patient’s condition has stabilized.
9.7 Summary of Chapter 9
Sometimes a person, aAer brain injury, displays sleep- wake cycles but has 
severely impaired, or entirely absent, responses to external stimuli. Traditionally, 
attempts have been made to distinguish the persistent vegetative state (PVS) 
from the minimally conscious state (MCS), itself subdivided into ‘MCS plus’ 
and ‘MCS minus’.
Diagnostic procedures for distinguishing PVS from MCS are subject to 
high error rates and high uncertainty. Moreover, there are cases of patients 
who, aAer being diagnosed as PVS through a very thorough application of 
behavioural criteria, show signatures of brain activity in response to com-
mands. And there is a realistic possibility that midbrain mechanisms suﬃce 
for basic valenced experiences, even if cortical injury prevents a patient from 
reporting these experiences.
In the context of pain management, an ‘assume sentient’ principle is appro-
priate. Any signs that would be interpreted as signs of pain or distress in a 
conscious patient should still be so interpreted in a patient with any disorder 
of consciousness, and pain relief administered. This treatment should not be 
reserved for a subset of patients, e.g. those thought to be minimally conscious. 
In fact, this ‘assume sentient’ principle can be extended, with care, to all clin-
ic al ly important decisions. This must be understood as a precautionary 
assumption— a way of erring on the side of caution— and not evidence for or 
against any particular prognosis.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
