12
The Clearest Candidates
12.1 Fishes and Invertebrates as the New Centre  
of the Debate
To regard a being as a sentience candidate is not to aﬃrm its sentience as 
certain, known, highly likely, or proven beyond reasonable doubt. It is just to 
aﬃrm a realistic possibility of sentience that it would be irresponsible to 
ignore, and an evidence base rich enough to allow the identiﬁcation of welfare 
risks and the design and assessment of precautions. When that bar is cleared, 
a deliberative process to assess proportionality is needed.
One consequence of shifing from certainty about sentience to sentience 
candidature is that the focus of the debate immediately moves much further 
away from humans, in evolutionary terms. All healthy adult mammals are 
plainly sentience candidates. The fact that the evidence fails to deliver absolute 
certainty is beside the point. It delivers candidature, so we have compelling 
reasons to think about the welfare risks our actions pose in relation to mammals. 
As foreshadowed in §5.10, I think the same holds for birds. There is good 
evidence that the avian pallium bears strong functional similarities to the 
mammalian neocortex,1 and there are consistent, credible positions according 
to which the diﬀerences of neural implementation (such as the diﬀerence 
between a laminar and nucleated organization) do not matter (positions R3, 
R4, and R5 in Chapter 6).
With reptiles2 and ﬁshes,3 there is more room for doubt about sentience, 
since there is neither a neocortex nor a clearly analogous structure (reptiles 
and ﬁshes do have a pallium, but its degree of functional similarity to the 
neocortex or avian pallium is still quite unclear).( Their sentience candidature 
is secured mainly by the tenability of midbrain- centred theories of sentience, 
such as those of Panksepp and Merker (positions R4 and R5 in Chapter 6), 
1 Güntürkün and Bugnyar (2016); Nieder et al. (2020).
2 I will use the term ‘reptile’ to mean ‘non- avian reptile’, following common parlance.
3 As I explained in Chapter 1, I will follow Balcombe’s (2016) suggestion to say ‘ﬁshes’ not ‘ﬁsh’ to 
help us remember that we are talking about individual animals.
( See Kalman (2009) for comparison of bird and reptile brains. See Zacks and Jablonka (2023) for 
a discussion of the functional signiﬁcance of a brain area in ﬁsh homologous with the mammalian 
hippocampus.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
