3HOO12I BF /-1G,.2 UV 
)FN
A special focus on pain can be defended pragmatically on two grounds. 
First, it has a special signiﬁcance for animal welfare law, because chronic and/
or intense pain poses a very serious welfare problem. This is re:ected in UK 
animal welfare law: for example, the Animal Welfare Act 2006 allows for 
 ministers to extend protection to invertebrate species if convinced by scien-
tiﬁc evidence of a capacity for ‘pain and suﬀering’. We can grant this special 
signiﬁcance while also maintaining that there are many other serious welfare 
problems, including other negative states (such as anxiety- like and boredom- 
like states) and being deprived of positive states, such as pleasure and joy.
Second, a lot of the empirical research into sentience in disputed taxa has 
focused on pain, and on testing for indicators of pain along the lines of the 
IME criteria. So, by taking these criteria as our starting point, and revising 
them modestly, we preserved alignment between the criteria being used to 
guide policy and the criteria many of the experiments in this area have sought 
to test.
Although pragmatic reasons can be good reasons, they lef me with a sense 
that, if we could have started with a blank canvas, liberated from the inertia of 
precedent, we might well have taken a less pain- centric approach. A focus on 
pain could lead to us missing other forms of sentience. We must be open to 
the possibility that the class of sentient animals is bigger than the class of ani-
mals that feel pain. With that point in mind, it is time to think about insects.
Proposal 17. Sentience is not pain. Although there are pragmatic reasons 
for the focus on pain in debates about animal sentience, we must be open 
to the possibility that the class of sentient animals is bigger than the class 
of animals that feel pain. Other forms of evidence can also make an animal 
a sentience candidate, such as evidence of sophisticated forms of learning, 
attention, working memory, and planning.
12.11 Summary of Chapter 12
Since all adult vertebrates are sentience candidates, debate in recent years has 
shifed towards invertebrates, where sentience candidature is more contestable. 
Octopuses are ofen regarded as sentient due to their large brains and impres-
sive intelligence. Yet sentience is neither intelligence nor brain size, and we 
should be aware of the possibility of decouplings between intelligence, brain 
size, and sentience in the animal kingdom. Precautions to safeguard animal 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
