+-::.GY )0 (H.N%EG R 
5M4
case of vision, long- running debates about blindsight epitomize two main 
sources of uncertainty: the criterion problem and the problem of confound-
ers. These sources of uncertainty arise even more strongly in the case of 
valenced experience (including emotions like fear), since methods for elicit-
ing unconscious analogues of valenced experiences are less mature.
In the absence of secure ways of dissociating valenced experience from its 
unconscious analogues, two rival pictures of the neural basis of valenced 
experience in the mammalian brain persist. On one picture, valenced ex peri-
ence wells up directly from subcortical mechanisms without the need for any 
further cortical processing. On the other, subcortical circuits produce co ord-
in ated behavioural responses without the involvement of any kind of con-
scious processing, with even the simplest, ‘anoetic’ level of consciousness 
requiring cortical ‘re- representation’ of subcortical activity. Current evidence 
does not allow us to choose conﬁdently between these pictures.
These research programmes have all had a strong mammalian focus, with 
most of the evidence coming from humans, macaques, and rats. They have 
not yielded theories that apply in a clear, unambiguous way to non- 
mammalian animals. In these cases, we are typically le7 with a good amount 
of behavioural evidence, and some understanding of the underlying neural 
mechanisms, but no agreed theoretical basis on which to judge how similar 
the neural mechanisms must be in order to support sentience. The most 
appropriate way forward in these cases is to use the evidence that exists to guide 
precautionary thinking, a task that will be taken up in Part II of the book.
The Edge of Sentience: Risk and Precaution in Humans, Other Animals, and AI. Jonathan Birch, Oxford University Press. 
© Jonathan Birch 2024. DOI: 10.1093/9780191966729.003.0006
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
