6
Converging on Precautions
My overall goal in this chapter and the two that follow is to build an ethically 
sound and practically feasible framework for designing policy at the edge of 
sentience: a framework to help us manage the uncertainty that threatens to 
lead to intractable disagreement and perpetual indecision. This chapter starts 
to shi! the focus away from scientiﬁc disagreement and towards policy 
decisions— decisions that have to be based, in one way or another, on uncer-
tain science.
By ‘policy’, I primarily mean public policy: the policy of a legitimate state. 
But I also, secondarily, mean the policies of smaller organizations, right down 
to the level of individual laboratories, hospitals, zoos, farms, or other busi-
nesses, which are o!en faced with the daunting challenge of interpreting gen-
eral laws and guidelines to ﬁt their speciﬁc circumstances. For the most part, 
I will not be discussing decisions of individuals in their personal lives.
By ‘framework’, I mean a way of thinking through the issues and reaching 
decisions that all can accept as fair. My aim here is not to tell you my ethical 
views, then recommend that the whole of society conform to those views. 
I have no wish to adopt the ‘philosopher as sage’ role (this is a theme to which 
I return at the end of Chapter 8). My question is rather: given that these are 
clearly divisive issues, and that immediate reactions will diﬀer, how can we 
move past our diﬀerences to manage our uncertainty and disagreement in a 
mutually acceptable way?
Three ideas are at the heart of my approach: a scientiﬁc meta- consensus 
about the range of empirically supported realistic possibilities, the bridging 
concepts of a sentience candidate and investigation priority, and an overlap-
ping consensus on the need to take proportionate precautions when risking 
harm to sentience candidates. Together, these ideas amount to a precaution-
ary framework for structuring our thinking about the edge of sentience. They 
are not magic tricks that remove all uncertainty and disagreement. They are 
tools to help us live with it.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
