B/,BGH3.3 13 ‘-B4B212I ?.2,.B21,.3’ 
)3L
recent evidence provides a much stronger case for regarding octopuses as 
sentience candidates than anything available in 1992. The precautionary step 
taken at that time has been vindicated.
Even so, with the beneﬁt of hindsight, we can now say that the considerations 
driving the decision at that time were a little dubious. The right decision was 
made, but probably not entirely for the right reasons. In particular, the presence 
of a ‘large neurological mass’ is questionable as a criterion for sentience.
The problem is not simply one of vagueness (what counts as large?) but 
also one of evidential import. Sentience is not brain size, and nor do we have 
any strong grounds for tying the likelihood of sentience to brain size. Most of 
the neurons in the human brain are in the cerebellum, a region involved in 
the implementation of motor commands that (as noted in Chapter 6) appears 
to contribute nothing to our conscious experiences. The picture emerging 
from human consciousness science (for all the disagreement it contains) is 
one on which the organization of neurons is what matters, not the raw 
numbers.2(
I grant that there can still be a weak evidential connection, in that a very 
small neuron count can motivate reasonable doubts about whether a brain 
could support any credible neural basis for sentience (even on the less cogni-
tively demanding theories, such as those of Merker and Panksepp). We will 
see an example of this when we consider nematodes in Chapter 13. However, 
it would be a mistake to put neuron counts at the centre of the picture.27
Along similar lines, it is important to note that sentience is also not the 
same as intelligence. Intelligence can give us a window into sentience, by 
making new types of sentience- relevant experiment possible. As a limiting 
case, consider how our intelligence, as humans, makes it easier for re searchers 
to investigate our sentience, because we can verbally report what we are feel-
ing. In a similar vein, the octopus is able to deploy its intelligence to succeed 
at tasks that are primarily testing for sentience.
In this sense, intelligence and sentience are methodologically linked: a high 
degree of the former can open up new methods of detecting the latter. But 
they are not the same property. Crucially, we need to be open to the possibil-
ity that animals which fail to set the world alight with their intelligence may 
nonetheless be sentient. That is an important lesson to bear in mind when 
considering other invertebrate taxa— such as crabs and lobsters.
2( A point also emphasized by Seth (2021).
27 See Shriver (2022) for a critique of the use of neuron counts as proxies for ‘welfare capacity’.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
