-12-01 3E4-5-61/ 012 0,-K/0 
)(
of sentience features very prominently in English translations of Buddhist 
works, hinting at an important convergence, but there are major diﬀerences 
in how the term is understood. The signiﬁcance of sentience for Tibetan 
Buddhists derives from the idea that all sentient life is part of the cycle of 
rebirth, saṃsāra. Within this tradition, sentience may be deﬁned as, roughly, 
‘that which makes a being part of saRsOra’. All macroscopic animals, includ-
ing insects, are assumed sentient. Microscopic animals and other microbes, 
unknown at the time the relevant texts were written, have an unresolved sta-
tus. Since the Western concept of sentience has no connotation of a cycle of 
rebirth, it would be misleading to suggest the exact same concept is at work. 
There is, nonetheless, enough common ground to make dialogue possible.
I came to see that, although there is no single Tibetan Buddhist position on 
the ethical signiﬁcance of sentience, there is a certain type of outlook, sub-
stantially shared with other Indian traditions. Tibetan Buddhism requires 
practitioners to cultivate an attitude of compassion and non- violence 
(ahimsa) towards all sentient life, but it does not lay down any strict prescrip-
tion of what compassion and non- violence require. For some, the demands 
are great: the Buddhist inhabitants of the Tsum Valley in Nepal have for over 
a hundred years prohibited the killing of any wild or domestic animals living 
in the valley. On the whole, however, Tibetan Buddhists typically do kill and 
eat animals, ofen arguing that this is a practical necessity in the harsh condi-
tions of the Tibetan plateau.
Jainism is known for interpreting the requirements of ahimsa in a highly 
demanding way.2A Ordinary Jains adhere to vegetarianism and cannot kill any 
animal, while Jainist ascetics must take great care in all their activities to avoid 
harming in any living being. They are known for sweeping the street in front 
of them to clear away any insects on which they might step, and in some cases 
wearing mouth- cloths to prevent accidental inhalation of insects (Fig. 4.1). 
Since, for Jains, plants too are part of saRsOra, ascetics must take care not to 
harm plants. They can accept food donations but cannot prepare food or 
have it prepared for them.
There is also a strong tradition of vegetarianism in Hinduism: around 
40–50 per cent of Hindus are vegetarian.2B This striking split tells us some-
thing of the internal diversity of Hinduism, which contains a great plural-
ity of holy texts rather than a single holy book. It also re9ects the outcome 
of a  troubled history in which an overwhelmingly vegetarian culture was 
2A The source for this paragraph is Jainpedia (https://www.jainpedia.org).
2B Corichi (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
