%KN 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
9.5 Moving Past the PVS/MCS Distinction
How far should we push this precautionary attitude to the PVS? I initially 
imagined this chapter would be about how to draw the distinction between 
the PVS and MCS in a suitably precautionary way. I thought the distinction 
itself was a clinically useful and important one, and the right way to think 
about the edge of sentience in these cases. But the more I researched the case, 
the more sceptical of this distinction I became.
The issue is not just terminological. As noted earlier, there have been calls 
for over ten years now to retire the problematic terminology of ‘vegetative’ 
and ‘vegetative state’ in favour of ‘unresponsive wakefulness syndrome’ 
(UWS).2C There is, however, a sense in which it is a conservative move to 
merely change the name of the PVS to UWS while retaining a commitment 
to the clinical importance of categorizing patients as UWS, MCS−, or 
MCS+. Steven Laureys and colleagues, in the paper that coins UWS, still 
endorse the received wisdom that there is a ‘need to clearly separate UWS 
from MCS’.2F The new concept retains the same basic function of demarcating 
a class of patients as ‘not even minimally conscious’ but does so under a 
new heading.
I think it is time to revisit the alleged need ‘to clearly separate UWS from 
MCS’. Given that we must remain open to the possibility of continuing 
valenced experience in the PVS (and for now, I will revert to the more trad-
ition al term), I think we should be very careful indeed about di!erentiating 
clinical treatment according to the PVS/MCS+/MCS− distinction in any way 
that involves assuming a lack of conscious experience in PVS patients. 
Moreover, we should be wary of describing any patient as ‘not even min im-
al ly conscious’, or saying anything that implies this. To do so risks eroding the 
precautionary attitude we need to cultivate.
The UK clinical guidance, mentioned earlier, is a step in the right direc-
tion. As we have seen, it rightly advises clinicians to give no weight to the 
PVS/MCS distinction. The fact that you think a patient may well be wholly 
unconscious, on the basis of their unresponsiveness, is not a suﬃcient reason 
to withhold pain relief. That is good precautionary thinking in action. The 
evidence about the rates of misdiagnosis and the potential for covert con-
sciousness underlines all of this in red ink, but it would still make sense to err 
2C Johnson (2022); Laureys et al. (2010).
2F Laureys et al. (2010, p. 68).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
