2 
SUMMA() O+ ,­. +(AM./O(K A1D P(OPOSA4S
inclusive democratic processes. These decisions should be revisited peri od ic-
al ly and whenever signiﬁcant new evidence emerges.
An example of an informed, inclusive, democratic process is a citizens’ 
panel or assembly that assesses the proportionality of possible responses by 
debating their permissibility- in- principle, adequacy, reasonable necessity, 
and consistency (the ‘PARC’ tests).
Proposals about Speciﬁc Cases
The following should be read as proposals for discussion and debate. There is 
a case for regarding the proposed measures as proportionate, so they merit 
consideration by an informed, inclusive democratic process, but my aim is 
not to pre- judge the outcome of such a process.
People with Disorders of Consciousness
Proposal 1. Assume sentient (speciﬁc). Any signs that would be interpreted as 
signs of pain or distress in a conscious patient should still be so interpreted in 
a patient with any disorder of consciousness, and pain relief administered. 
This treatment should not be reserved for a subset of patients, e.g. those diag-
nosed as minimally conscious.
Proposal 2. Assume sentient (general). A patient with a prolonged disorder of 
consciousness should not be assumed incapable of experience when an 
important clinical decision is made. All clinical decisions should consider the 
patient’s best interests as comprehensively as possible, working on the pre-
cautionary assumption that there is a realistic possibility of valenced experi-
ence and a continuing interest in avoiding suﬀering and in achieving 
well- being, but without taking this assumption to have implications regard-
ing prognosis.
Proposal 3. Avoid line- drawing (general). The diagnostic categories of PVS, 
MCS−, and MCS+ should be phased out in therapeutic and legal contexts. 
Clinicians should work with the broader category of ‘prolonged dis order of 
consciousness’ (PDOC) and with proﬁles of individual patients, tailoring 
care to the patient’s individual needs.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
