T() )T(0C8C /0E,0.0C8,C) O. M8C),C) 
KG
experience, we are talking about an essentially conscious property. There 
could be unconscious properties with similar motivational roles to positive 
and negative valence, but they would not be the exact same properties. By 
contrast, on Carruthers’s account, unconscious valence does make sense. 
Non- conceptual representations of value may be either conscious or uncon-
scious. You might unconsciously represent the food as good while consciously 
disliking it. Indeed, your valenced conscious experiences may be the tip of a 
large iceberg of unconscious valenced states. The third, imperativist view may 
fall either way on this question, depending on the precise nature of the 
im pera tive (if the content is ‘more of this experience!’, it may be essentially 
conscious). We will pick this question up again in Chapter 5, when we con-
sider whether there is good evidence for unconscious valence.
2.6 The Ethical Signiﬁcance of Valence
When we think of bodily sensations such as pain, hunger, thirst, and breath-
lessness, it is the aﬀective aspect of these bodily sensations, and not the sensory 
information they contain, that lies at the root of their ethical signi!cance.21 
For example, if an analgesic (painkiller) only takes away information about 
the location of an injury, without removing the unpleasantness— so that the 
subject just feels a diﬀuse feeling of unpleasantness, no longer tied to any 
speci!c part of the body, but just as intense as it was before, perhaps akin to 
the feeling of sepsis— it is not a good analgesic. Yet if a drug removes the 
unpleasantness without removing the registration of an injury at a speci!c 
location, it may still be a very useful analgesic. It targets the aspect of pain 
that there is an ethical imperative to reduce. This point oﬀers further support 
for de!nitions of sentience that go beyond pain and encompass all felt aﬀective 
states. It is not just that these de!nitions capture more of what matters— they 
also capture what matters more precisely in the case of pain itself, by drawing 
our attention to its aﬀective aspect.
However, the two core dimensions of aﬀect are not equal in their ethical 
signi!cance: valence is more important than arousal. Imagine a drug that 
ﬂips the valence of pain without altering the arousal aspect, converting a 
high- arousal pain state into a high- arousal pleasure state. Contrast this with a 
drug that alters arousal while leaving valence unchanged: the pain still feels 
extremely bad, but it no longer rouses a patient from a feeling of drowsy 
21 Shriver (2018a).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
