2CE 
()ON,-.)/ O( 0)O0O),-ON12-,3
Secondly, critics will claim that an onerous licensing scheme will stiﬂe 
innovation and incentivize innovators to take their ideas to countries with 
less onerous approaches and lower welfare standards. If there is a risk that 
costly changes will be required by the licensing process, better to avoid that 
risk by doing something else, or by moving somewhere else. Moreover, the 
costs of commissioning a new code of good practice in the ﬁrst place are likely 
to run into the tens of thousands, adding to the initial fundraising challenge 
any new company faces.
How seriously should we take these criticisms? How should we strike a bal-
ance between being too onerous (driving away innovation) and not onerous 
enough (enabling gratuitous suﬀering)? My own view is that we should be 
selectively incentivizing types of innovation that do not create serious animal 
welfare risks. So, I do not myself see the threat of stiﬂing certain kinds of eth-
ic al ly risky innovation as a good reason to avoid a licensing scheme. To return 
to a now- familiar point, citizens’ panels can help with these delicate trade- 
oﬀs. I am not suggesting that panels should be convened for individual licens-
ing decisions, because that would risk overusing them. I can imagine a future 
in which citizens’ panels are so deeply entwined with the machinery of 
democracy that they are convened for such ﬁne- grained decisions, but I do 
not think we are ready for that just yet. What I am suggesting is that citizens’ 
panels should be involved in the process through which a licensing scheme is 
initially established.
14.3 Against Octopus Farming
I said earlier that a licensing scheme may be the most proportionate way to 
manage the welfare risks posed by new farming ventures involving sentience 
candidates with ‘one important exception’. The exception is octopus farming. 
It is very unlikely that octopus farming could ever meet reasonable ex pect-
ations in regard to animal welfare, leading me to propose that it would be 
proportionate to ban it. At the time of writing, such a ban would be largely 
pre- emptive in most countries, because, as a result of the great practical chal-
lenges involved in farming octopuses, there is no well- established octopus 
farming industry. But this is an important and worrying moment, because 
there are ongoing attempts establish such operations in several countries 
(Spain, Japan, Mexico, Chile, and China).F
F Jacquet et al. (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
