%KM 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
major mainstream position in the debate, but not the only reasonable pos-
ition (see Chapter 5).
Panksepp and colleagues have rightly criticized the task force’s remarks on 
this issue.2I As we saw in Chapter 5, Panksepp’s own theory of the basic emo-
tions gives special signi8cance to the periaqueductal gray (PAG), a midbrain 
region. There is good evidence that the PAG is either causally or constitu-
tively involved in a!ective experiences, since stimulating the PAG induces 
such experiences. Panksepp hypothesized that the relationship is a constitu-
tive one.
As I explained in Chapter 5, I am not myself convinced that the PAG’s role 
is constitutive. The question is open. But Panksepp’s view is a reasonable one, 
backed by a credible interpretation of a substantial body of evidence. We need 
to take seriously the possibility that it is correct, and think about what pre-
cautions may be proportionate if it is. As Panksepp and colleagues put it:
If we consider the accruing evidence and theory about the basic nature of 
a!ect, and use it as a guideline for our thinking, we would be wise to accept 
the realistic possibility (although perhaps not the high probability, as we do) 
that PVS patients can still experience some remnants of a!ective experience 
even though their cognitive abilities are gone.21
Caroline Schnakers and collaborators have made a similar point.22 Note that 
this point still applies even if there is no evidence at all of cognitive- motor 
dissociation. We are not talking here about a subset of patients with a PVS 
diagnosis, namely those able to display residual cognitive abilities through 
patterns of brain activity. We are talking about all such patients.
9.4 Pain Management and the ‘Assume Sentient’ Principle
The message about erring on the side of caution has permeated through to 
clinical guidance in the UK. In 2020, the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) 
published the latest version of its clinical guidelines for prolonged disorders 
of consciousness. The guidelines call for a precautionary attitude in the con-
text of pain management, writing that:
2I Panksepp et al. (2007).
21 Panksepp et al. (2007, p. 9).
22 Schnakers and Zasler (2007, 2015); Schnakers et al. (2012).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
