72) 78),:0 7,­ )M./­+M),T ,):)66720F 
6B
neuro ns don’t intrinsically exist, but exist only in a derived sense, as “op er-
ation al substrates” for conscious subjects? What sort of explanation is that?’ 
IIT may be o!ering explanations, but they are not the sort of functional- 
mechanistic- reductive explanations that neuroscience- as- usual recognizes. 
The charge here should not be ‘pseudoscience!’ but rather ‘science too far 
away from mainstream neuroscience to be evaluated and tested in a common 
framework alongside mainstream theories!’.
How should we handle IIT when thinking about practical decisions at the 
edge of sentience? In consciousness science, researchers outside the IIT fold 
o4en distinguish fundamental IIT (or strong IIT), the full version of the the-
ory including its idiosyncratic metaphysical background picture, from empir-
ical IIT (or weak IIT), which simply claims that, in the human brain, the 
neural correlate of conscious experience is the posterior cortical hot zone, 
and that the high causal integration of this region (as captured in Ф) is what 
allows it to play this role.4I Empirical IIT can be tested and evaluated along-
side other hypotheses about the neural correlates of consciousness (see 
Chapter 5 for discussion of this type of work). However, it is also a very thin 
claim, compatible with any metaphysical background picture, and it has no 
particular implications for the distribution of sentience. The explanatory core 
of the theory has been taken out. By contrast, fundamental IIT includes elem-
ents that are strongly speculative, and therefore has a similar status to biopsy-
chism. Like biopsychism, it can legitimately be o!ered as a speculation. 
However, it would be a mistake to describe the fundamental version of the 
theory as empirically supported.
3.5 Are Agency and Embodiment Necessary?
I want to turn now to an axis of disagreement that cross- cuts the divide 
between materialism and rival big pictures. It concerns whether agency and/
or embodiment are needed for conscious experience.
I ﬁnd my own thoughts on this 5uctuate. When I consider other animals, it 
seems very plausible that embodiment matters. Yet neural organoids raise the 
possibility of what Tim Bayne, Anil Seth, and Marcello Massimini have called 
‘islands of awareness’: conscious subjects with neither the ability to perceive 
the world nor the ability to act in it.4K Meanwhile, the idea of sentient AI 
4I See Michel and Lau (2020); Mediano et al. (2019, 2022). Precise formulations of the distinction 
vary, and IIT’s proponents themselves reject any such distinction.
4K Bayne et al. (2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
