)4F 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
predicts a target to your right.(1 All of this evidence is inconclusive, and 
subject to the methodological challenges explained in Chapter 5. It can, 
nonetheless, shif probabilities.
12.6 My Team’s Revised Criteria
Our revised criteria (Box 12.2) revised and updated the IME criteria in sev-
eral ways to address these problems. Since our project was (and is) based at 
the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), I will call these 
the ‘LSE criteria’ for short. Criteria 1–3 replaced the emphasis on ‘higher’ and 
‘lower’ brain regions with an emphasis on integrative brain regions receiving 
input from multiple sensory sources. Instead of a narrow focus on opioids, 
our criterion 4 allowed various forms of responsiveness to endogenous com-
pounds or drugs to count as evidence of sentience, if they modulate the ani-
mal’s behaviour in a way consistent with the hypothesis that these compounds 
are altering the animal’s experiences of pain, distress, or harm.
(1 Ben- Haim et al. (2021).
Box 12.2 The LSE criteria for sentience (focused on the case 
of pain)
1. Nociception. The animal possesses receptors sensitive to noxious 
stimuli (nociceptors).
2. Sensory integration. The animal possesses integrative brain regions 
capable of integrating information from diﬀerent sensory sources.
3. Integrated nociception. The animal possesses neural pathways con-
necting the nociceptors to the integrative brain regions.
4. Analgesia. The animal’s behavioural response to a noxious stimulus is 
modulated by chemical compounds aﬀecting the nervous system in 
either or both of the following ways:
a. The animal possesses an endogenous neurotransmitter system that 
modulates (in a way consistent with the experience of pain, distress, 
or harm) its responses to threatened or actual noxious stimuli.
b. Putative local anaesthetics, analgesics (such as opioids), anxiolytics, 
or anti- depressants modify an animal’s responses to threatened or 
actual noxious stimuli in a way consistent with the hypothesis that 
these compounds attenuate the experience of pain, distress, or harm.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
