2G) 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
Proposal 18. Some invertebrates are sentience candidates. Coleoid 
cephalopod molluscs, decapod crustaceans of the suborder Pleocyemata, 
and insects (all when in the adult stage) are sentience candidates. Debates 
about proportionality are warranted in cases where human activities 
create risks of suﬀering to these animals. Decapod crustaceans of the 
suborder Dendrobranchiata, insect larvae, spiders, gastropods, and 
nematode worms are investigation priorities.
It is time now to turn to the diFcult question of what proportionality could 
require of us in these cases.
13.6 Summary of Chapter 13
The idea of pain in insects has ofen been dismissed on the grounds that insects 
will continue normal feeding and mating behaviours despite catastrophic injury. 
But this is compatible with insects having aversive experiences in response to 
other stimuli, such as heat, and there is emerging evidence that they do.
Importantly, sentience is not just pain, and there are ways to make a case for 
insect sentience that do not proceed via responses to noxious stimuli. There is 
evidence that insects have a behavioural core control unit functionally similar 
to that taken to be suFcient for sentience by Merker’s theory. There is also 
evidence, mainly from bees, of working memory and of forms of associative 
learning that seem to be facilitated by conscious experience in humans. These 
lines of evidence push us to take seriously the possibility of sentience in insects.
When we turn our attention to molluscs other than the cephalopods (such 
as gastropod molluscs, including snails) and other arthropods (such as arach-
nids, including spiders) we :nd a frustrating paucity of studies looking for 
markers of sentience. There is some evidence of prospective simulation in 
Portia spiders, suggesting experiments aimed at exploring sentience in arach-
nids would be worthwhile. But we currently lack the sort of evidence base 
that would be needed to inform evidenced- based discussions about propor-
tionality. These animals, along with nematode worms and insect larvae, 
should be seen as investigation priorities.
The Edge of Sentience: Risk and Precaution in Humans, Other Animals, and AI. Jonathan Birch, Oxford University Press. 
© Jonathan Birch 2024. DOI: 10.1093/9780191966729.003.0014
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
