4
Ethics and Religion
Let us shif the focus from the metaphysics of sentience to its ethical signiﬁcance. 
Here too, my aim is to map out the zone of reasonable disagreement, not to 
take sides and dig trenches. Chapter 2 introduced three ethical outlooks on 
which sentience has great signiﬁcance: classical utilitarianism, Korgaard’s 
neo- Kantian view, and Nussbaum’s expanded capabilities approach. On these 
views, sentience is necessary and suﬃcient for moral standing, where moral 
standing (or moral status) implies that a being has interests that matter eth ic-
al ly for their own sake, and not just because they matter to some other being, 
such as a human owner.
We can call this a sentientist view of moral standing.1 Sentientism, used in 
this way, is an umbrella term for a range of views that disagree on many things 
but agree on the special moral importance of sentience. Sentientism, how-
ever, does not exhaust the space of reasonable positions regarding the ethical 
signiﬁcance of sentience, and it is time to consider the alternatives. One can 
depart by rejecting the idea that sentience is necessary for moral standing 
and/or by rejecting the idea that sentience is suﬃcient.
4.1 Bio- and Ecocentrism
Let us ﬁrst consider the idea that sentience is unnecessary. There are various 
ways of developing this idea. One is a view on which all living things, sentient 
or not, but still regarded as individuals, have morally signiﬁcant interests.2 
Reasonable versions of this view must still, I contend, allow that sentience is 
a major dividing line, in so far as sentience confers much greater moral sig-
niﬁcance on an organism’s interests and warrants a claim to higher priority. 
1 The term ‘sentientism’ goes back to at least the 1970s, where it was used by critics of Peter Singer 
and Richard Ryder as a label for their position, and then adopted by Ryder (Woodhouse 2018). Gary 
Varner (1998, 2012) ofen used the term as a label for his view. Other sentientists in recent literature 
include Shepherd (2018); Lee (2019); DeGrazia (2021); and Gilbert and Martin (2022).
2 Duran (1999); Goodpaster (1978); Kallhoﬀ (2014). The idea that all life has moral standing, 
whether sentient or not, needs to be distinguished from the view that sentience is present in non- 
animal life, such as plants or microbes (Reber 2018; Segundo- Ortin and Calvo 2023). This view will 
receive criticism later.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
