2E) 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
overlapping stimuli can even be achieved in ‘preparations’ of Aplysia where 
only the mantle organs and abdominal ganglion remain.86 This is a reminder 
of the importance of looking for more demanding forms of associative learn-
ing, such as trace conditioning, where there is some evidence in the human 
case of the involvement of conscious processing. There is also one report in 
the literature of trace conditioning in (whole) pond snails, but when a pro-
ced ure involves presenting the snails with olfactory stimuli in the water, then 
rinsing them for 15 seconds to wash oﬀ the stimulus, it is diFcult to be sure 
that the CS has entirely gone by the time the US arrives.87
There is, however, robust evidence of operant conditioning (increased fre-
quency of rewarded behaviours, decreased frequency of punished behav-
iours) in both Aplysia sea slugs and Lymnaea pond snails. Sea slugs rewarded 
for biting will bite more ofen,8B and pond snails (which live in water, but 
come to the surface to breathe when the water lacks oxygen) will surface for 
air less ofen if punished for doing so.8C This can be compared against evi-
dence from Lina Skora and colleagues suggesting (albeit tentatively) that even 
apparently quite simple operant conditioning tasks require conscious aware-
ness of the stimuli when a human is performing them. Skora et al. themselves 
remark that:
The absence of unconscious instrumental conditioning reported here might 
seem intriguing in light of previous evidence that instrumental conditioning 
can proceed in simpler— presumably unconscious— organisms, such as fruit 
ﬂies (Drosophila), sea slugs (Aplysia), or pond snails (Lymnaea).9D
We should certainly question the idea that these animals are ‘presumably 
unconscious’. That said, the tasks posed by Skora et al., though simple for 
humans, were signi:cantly more complicated than the tasks so far presented 
to gastropods, because they required subjects to learn diﬀerent conditioned 
responses to diﬀerent visual cues. Gastropods have so far displayed only the 
simplest kind of operant conditioning, in which a behaviour is performed 
less ofen afer punishment and more ofen afer reward. Bjorn Brembs and 
colleagues report this form of operant conditioning can be achieved even by 
86 Hawkins et al. (1998). Remarkably, even second- order conditioning was observed in this 
preparation.
87 Alexander et al. (1982). Thanks to Eric Schwitzgebel for sending me this reference.
8B Brembs et al. (2002).
8C Dalesman et al. (2011); Lukowiak et al. (1996, 1998, 2000).
9D Skora et al. (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
