786 
D04A()NG -R,-,R(),NA/)(5
8.2 A Pragmatic Analysis of Proportionality
Let us turn now to what happens when a panel actually meets. The nature of 
the risk, and the potential harms that could result if nothing is done, are 
explained to them by experts in accessible way. Their ﬁrst task is to decide 
whether or not to co- opt new members to increase the representation of 
aﬀected minorities or other groups. Their next task is to assess the options for 
their proportionality. To do this, the panel will need assistance from scientiﬁc 
experts, legal experts, and ethics experts. But the role of these experts needs 
to be carefully circumscribed— with the panel itself ruling on the critical 
evaluative questions— if the tyranny of expert values is to be avoided. How 
should deliberation about proportionality be structured?
I want to propose four tests (or conditions, criteria) for proportionality: 
permissibility- in- principle, adequacy, reasonable necessity, and consistency. A 
proposed response to a threat that passes these ‘PARC’ tests can be con sidered 
proportionate. I do not intend this as a conceptual analysis of ‘proportionality’. 
I do not think ordinary language terms are in general amenable to conceptual 
analyses that give precise necessary and su?cient conditions. What I intend 
can be better described as a pragmatic analysis: a proposal about the 
questions we should be discussing, and the sequence in which we should dis-
cuss them, if we want a deliberative process to arrive at a judgement about 
proportionality that can command conﬁdence.
Test 1: Permissibility-in-Principle
This is a test any proposed response to a risk must meet to deserve further 
consideration. It must be that, given our shared values (as represented in the 
panel), the response could at least in principle form part of an ethically per-
missible response in the right circumstances, if other conditions are met.
There is a legal component to this test: proposed policy responses to iden-
tiﬁed risks should be compatible with international human rights law. Legal 
experts need to be involved in the process to rule on this question, and save 
the panel’s time by excluding options that would be straightforwardly incom-
patible with human rights. That does not mean, however, that proportionate 
measures cannot involve any element of suspending rights. Many human 
rights are considered by the law to be ‘qualiﬁed’, in the sense that it is legal for 
a public authority to restrict them as a proportionate means to a legitimate 
aim, such as a public health aim. The COVID- 19 pandemic gave us all 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
