%%8 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
mechanisms crucially involving the midbrain. Moreover, it can also 
be achieved by other brain mechanisms performing relevantly analo-
gous functions (such as the central complex in insects).
These ﬁve positions are ordered from less inclusive to more inclusive. R5 is 
the most inclusive, in the sense that the distribution of sentience in 
the animal kingdom is likely to be the widest if this position is correct, 
since midbrain mechanisms are far more widely shared than neocortical 
mechanisms.
By contrast, it is not reasonable, given current evidence, to give serious 
attention in practical contexts to views less inclusive than R1 (such as a view 
on which sentience requires a developed capacity for natural language) or 
more inclusive than R5 (such as a view on which the spinal cord is said to 
support sentience by itself in the absence of a brainstem). The evidence does 
not support taking these views seriously in practical contexts.
There is no consensus about which of R1–R5 is correct, and each option can 
be Aeshed out in many diﬀerent ways. At the most inclusive end of the reason-
able range, Merker, Panksepp, and Solms have defended midbrain- centric 
theories that are neutral between R4 and R5,B while Barron and Klein, 
Ginsburg and Jablonka, Feinberg and Mallatt, and Tye have defended ver-
sions of R5.C Damasio can be placed approximately between R3 and R4, since 
he has o!en emphasized the importance of both the midbrain and some parts 
of the cortex (especially the insular and somatosensory cortex).D
Meanwhile, many cortex- centric computational functionalist theories, 
such as the global workspace theory, the perceptual reality monitoring theory, 
and the recurrent processing theory are most naturally interpreted as ver-
sions of R3. Both Dehaene and Lau posit important roles for distinctively 
primate mechanisms in the human implementation of the mechanisms they 
take to be responsible for conscious experience, while allowing that simpler 
versions of these mechanisms could be implemented in other ways in other 
species.E Lamme, in developing the recurrent processing theory, focuses on 
B Merker (2007); Panksepp (1998a); Solms (2021).
C Barron and Klein (2016); Feinberg and Mallatt (2016); Ginsburg and Jablonka (2019); Klein and 
Barron (2016); Tye (2016).
D Damasio et al. (2000, 2013); Damasio and Carvalho (2013); Parvizi and Damasio (2001).
E Dehaene (2014); Lau (2022). Dehaene proposes a key role for dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in 
implementing the global neuronal workspace, while Lau proposes a key role for dorsolateral and 
frontopolar prefrontal cortex in implementing perceptual reality monitoring, but both allow that 
these mechanisms may have alternative implementations in other animals.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
