- 6;.)R-T) -2T)R,-T0?) 
327
control over the procedures used. We would just need to make sure that 
research on the artiﬁcial emulations was regulated in a similar way to research 
on living systems, and was not an ethical free- for- all, with extreme forms of 
torture permitted.
In sum, to enact any ban would be to forego signiﬁcant beneﬁts, which may 
be economic, epistemic, and/or ethical in nature, depending on the details of 
what exactly is banned. Given this, I think more moderate options should 
also be on the table. Remember that a pillar of proportionality is reasonable 
necessity: a precaution is not proportionate if there is another permissible 
route to an adequate level of risk reduction that causes less harm. A common 
reaction to Metzinger’s proposal is that it is excessive: it goes beyond what is 
reasonably necessary. So we should ask: what else might deliver an adequate 
level of risk reduction?
17.2 A Moderate Alternative
Schneider has proposed a way forward rather less radical than Metzinger’s. 
It consists of the following three proposals:
First, ongoing testing for consciousness should be a normal part of the 
research and development of domain- general, sophisticated AI systems. [. . .]
Second, if a system is conscious, we should extend the same legal protec-
tions to the AI we extend to other sentient beings.
Third, if we are uncertain whether a given type of AI is conscious, but we 
have some reason to believe it may be, even in the absence of a deﬁnitive 
test, a precautionary stance suggests that we should extend the same legal 
protections to it that we extend to other sentient beings.A
One di3culty with the ﬁrst proposal is that it is unclear what form ‘ongoing 
testing’ should take (see Chapter 16), and Schneider’s proposals say nothing 
about what should happen when serious ongoing testing is rendered impos-
sible by the lack of any adequate grip on what the tests should be. But the 
dearth of satisfactory tests is a problem for everyone, not just Schneider. Any 
attempt to regulate AI research without banning it completely, including my 
own proposal later, will run into this wall in one way or another. All I can do 
is encourage more research into this fundamental problem.
A Schneider (2020, pp. 454–455, paragraph breaks added).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
