6? 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
developed to replace various human cognitive and perceptual functions. This 
will allow opportunities to test whether there is any associated loss of phe-
nom en ology when a function is taken over by an implant. For example, if we 
replace primary visual cortex with a functionally equivalent implant, does the 
subject report a total loss of visual phenomenology (similar to blindsight: see 
§5.2), unaltered visual phenomenology, or something in between: visual phe-
nom en ology that is still present but strangely altered? The idea is that, if the 
replacement robustly leads to loss of phenomenology, no matter how close 
the functional match gets, then this is evidence that the substrate itself is 
responsible for that loss— substrate sensitivity. Alternatively, if the visual phe-
nom en ology is unaltered, that provides evidence for substrate neutrality. An 
in- between case may suggest an intermediate possibility in which the charac-
ter of our visual phenomenology is substrate sensitive but its presence or 
absence is not. Schneider calls this the ‘chip test’.H3
However, the inferences involved strike me as hasty. Loss of phe nom en-
ology might also be taken as evidence that we had matched functions at the 
wrong level of analysis. It might point towards the importance of very low- 
level functions we had neglected to match, such as the computations per-
formed within neurons or phase- amplitude couplings between neurons.H4 It 
could yet be that emulating those low- level functions— in any substrate— 
would restore phenomenology. Schneider’s thought is that if, over the long 
run, we really do try everything— complete matching of functions at all levels 
of analysis right down to the lowest levels— so that nothing except the ma ter-
ial substrate is altered, and we still ﬁnd a loss of phenomenology, that would 
be evidence of substrate sensitivity. I agree, but I am no longer conﬁdent the 
implants now being envisioned are physically possible.
Meanwhile, unaltered phenomenology might be taken as evidence that the 
neural basis of conscious experience is really somewhere other than where 
the implant is located. Inferences here are further complicated by the well- 
known plasticity of the brain. Perhaps the substituted region is normally part 
of the neural basis of consciousness but that basis shi4s elsewhere when that 
region is substituted by an implant. A separate problem with this second 
inference, emphasized by David Billy Udell and Eric Schwitzgebel, is that 
H3 The test somewhat resembles Chalmers’s (1996, ch. 7) ‘fading qualia’ thought experiment, except 
that Schneider is envisaging an actual process of replacement with uncertain outcomes, not a coun-
terfactual, idealized process of neuron- by- neuron replacement. Schneider also proposes a second test 
that is not a test of substrate neutrality, but looks for signs of consciousness assuming substrate neu-
trality. This ‘artiﬁcial consciousness test’ will be discussed much later, in §16.2.
H4 On computations within neurons, see Donato et al. (2019). On phase- amplitude coupling, see 
Munia and Aviyente (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
