0/ABCBON DOBN-C 
88
We should not forget that many invertebrates are microscopic, far smaller 
than even copepods or brine shrimp. Our environment is full of nematode 
worms, dust mites, tardigrades, rotifers, and more. Many plankton are zoo-
plankton, part of the animal kingdom. If all animals are sentient, then sen-
tience must be achievable on a microscopic scale, and our beds and carpets 
must be teeming with sentient beings. It is not unreasonable to have doubts 
about that. It is a realistic possibility that sentience could be present in larger, 
more complex invertebrates, like octopuses, yet absent in many other 
invertebrates.
We can talk of an edge of sentience in multiple senses. There is an edge in 
the world: a real boundary to the class of sentient beings. There is also a 
boundary in our conﬁdence, marking the point at which beings become dis-
similar enough to ourselves that we start to entertain serious doubts about 
their sentience. We can hope that the two line up well: that the real boundary 
is located somewhere in the region where we feel least conﬁdent. But we 
should be aware of the risk that we may have got things very wrong: it could 
be that our levels of conﬁdence systematically fail to track the real boundary. 
Di;erent again are practical edges of sentience: the boundaries we draw in 
contexts where we have to make decisions. This book is about all three kinds 
of edge, but it is the practical edges that will receive most attention.
1.2 Decision Points
Where, then, is the line between sentient and non- sentient beings to be 
drawn? It is tempting to throw our hands aloE and say ‘Maybe we’ll never 
know!’. But practical and legal contexts force a choice.
I had some direct experience of this when I advised the UK government on 
what is now the Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act 2022, or ‘Sentience Act’. The 
UK had just leE the European Union, which includes (in its Lisbon Treaty) a 
commitment to regard animals as sentient beings. The government declined 
to import this clause directly into UK law, leading to some bad press. It 
reacted by promising to introduce new legislation to enshrine respect for ani-
mal sentience, and the proposed new law aimed to do that. Moreover, it 
sought to surpass the Lisbon Treaty by putting all ministers under a statutory 
duty to consider the animal welfare impacts of their decisions.
The government (more speciﬁcally, the Department for Environment, 
Food, and Rural A;airs, Defra) ran into a thorny problem: which animals 
should be covered by this duty? All of them, including copepods, dust mites, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
