776 
4E;,3L ­,234­/50
leaves open the possibility that there may be other scenarios in which we 
should consider precautions. I am describing here one route to sentience 
candidature that runs via taking midbrain- centric theories of consciousness 
ser ious ly, but there may well be other routes, running via diﬀerent theories.
The proposal says ‘develops or innervates’, highlighting two diﬀerent ways 
in which an organoid could acquire a functioning brainstem. One is spon tan-
eous development, along the lines of the optic vesicles spontaneously devel-
oped by an organoid in Gabriel and colleagues’ study.1G The other is through 
innervating animal tissue, along the lines of the innervation of a spinal cord 
by an organoid in Giandomenico and colleagues’ study.1H
We may well ﬁnd that future model systems in neuroscience increasingly 
blur the boundary between organoids and chimeras, as more and more living 
brain tissue from a host animal is used in mixed human- animal ‘preparations’. 
One can imagine a future variation on the Giandomenico et al. study that 
takes the whole living brainstem from a mouse, not just the spinal cord, and 
connects it to an organoid. Such a system may realistically possess the mid-
brain mechanisms that lead us to regard humans with conditions such as 
hydranencephaly as sentience candidates. So, the pressure of consistency 
should push us towards regarding this system as a sentience candidate too.
11.7 Possible Regulatory Frameworks
The proposed ‘brainstem rule’ leaves open what would be a proportionate 
response to an organoid’s sentience candidature. Among the possible 
responses are a moratorium (time- limited ban) or even an indeﬁnite (not 
time- limited) ban on the creation of these particular organoids. I take these 
seriously as options that may be proportionate, and I resist the idea that they 
would amount to drastic or radical restrictions on biomedical research. They 
should be options that are on the table when we debate these issues.
There is, afer all, a huge amount of valuable research that can be done on 
organoids without getting anywhere near the edge of sentience. Researchers 
could invest their time in simpler neural organoids or in non- neural orga-
noids, such as kidney organoids and gastrointestinal organoids. A comparable 
line of reasoning is ofen considered plausible in relation to the idea of experi-
menting on embryos well past the 14- day limit. Yes, we could learn much 
from research on older embryos, but there are grave and justiﬁed ethical 
concerns surrounding the idea of experimenting on sentient embryos, and 
1G Gabriel et al. (2021).
1H Giandomenico et al. (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
