T() )T(0C8C /0E,0.0C8,C) O. M8C),C) 
KJ
A very diﬀerent route runs through Christine Korsgaard’s neo- Kantian 
 ethics.23 On this view, we have a fundamental obligation to respect all sen-
tient beings as ‘ends- in- themselves’ and to avoid using them as ‘mere means’ 
to our own ends. Sentient beings are not tools or instruments for our use; 
they have their own lives to lead, and those lives deserve our respect. The 
terminology comes from Kant, but the picture is vastly more inclusive of 
other animals than Kant’s own ethics (see §4.2). What is it to respect animals 
as ends- in- themselves? It is to treat as valuable those ends (goals) that ani-
mals themselves value, simply because they value them. And, for Korsgaard, 
it is through having valenced experiences that animals are able to value and 
disvalue ends in the sense that matters.
Think of a dog eating a dog treat. There are several diﬀerent senses in 
which the dog might be said to ‘value’ the treat. We might mean that the dog 
strongly prefers the treats over alternatives, or that the treats can be used as 
positive reinforcers when training the dog. On Korsgaard’s view, the sense of 
‘valuing’ that matters from an ethical point of view is that the dog feels posi-
tively valenced experiences when eating the treats. Without valenced ex peri-
ences, there can be no valuing of ends in the sense that can make moral claims 
on others.
A third route, very diﬀerent again from the !rst two, runs through Martha 
Nussbaum’s capabilities approach to justice.24 On this picture, the funda-
mental imperative of justice is to help all beings capable of ‘signi!cant striv-
ing’ to achieve a kind of ﬂourishing appropriate to their form of life, without 
being ‘wrongfully thwarted’ by others. But which beings are capable of ‘sig-
ni!cant striving’? The view initially sounds like it will be radically inclusive of 
all living things, since one can talk even of plants and bacteria striving, ﬂour-
ishing, and being thwarted. But in fact Nussbaum sees only beings with ‘a felt 
orientation towards what is seen as good and a felt aversion to what is seen as 
bad’25 as capable of being treated justly or unjustly. A plant can be thwarted 
but not wrongfully thwarted, because the frustration of its goal- directed 
behaviours will not register unpleasantly in its subjective point of view on the 
world. Here, too, it is valenced experiences that matter.
Three very diﬀerent ethical theories, then, have converged on the idea that 
valenced experience is of fundamental ethical importance.27 Not experience 
23 Korsgaard (2018). I have criticized Korsgaard’s arguments in a detailed review (Birch 2020b).
24 Nussbaum (2006, 2023). For critical discussion of Nussbaum’s views, see Read and Birch (2023).
25 Nussbaum (2023, p. 119).
27 DeGrazia (1996) has also noted the wide convergence on this point from a variety of ethical 
outlooks.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
