72) T()2) ./2­)23+,) S+,­)T)2M+,7T)T :76)6 /F 6),T+),:)F  
;G
compatible with positing the gradual evolution of richer, more complex 
forms, as natural selection shapes the content of experience over time.I1 In 
other words, a defender of a sharp boundary can still be a gradualist about 
the evolution of rich, contentful experience. I ﬁnd it helpful to call the view 
just described ‘shallow gradualism’, in contrast to the ‘deep gradualism’ of 
those who deny there was even a sharp transition between absence of con-
sciousness and its most minimal form.
What would an ‘extremely minimal and simple form’ of experience be like? 
It is something we struggle to imagine, just as we struggle to imagine the 
experiences of any other animal. As noted in §2.1, Simona Ginsburg and Eva 
Jablonka have suggested the metaphor of ‘white noise’. The idea of content-
less, crackling static is still a familiar one, even in the digital age. We can also 
introspect statistical noise in our own experiences (think of looking around at 
night, trying to discern objects in the crackling static of your night vision). 
We can imagine an experiential state that is all noise, no signal. Ginsburg and 
Jablonka speculate that the ﬁrst conscious experiences in the earliest nerve 
nets were something like this. Of course, ‘white noise’ is an imperfect meta-
phor, because white noise has colour and timbre, whereas the state being 
envisaged is completely contentless. This contentless ‘white noise’ experience 
may have come along for free with the electrical activity of the ﬁrst nervous 
systems, Ginsburg and Jablonka speculate, perhaps providing the raw ma ter-
ial on which natural selection started working, gradually incorporating more 
and more content.
When I ﬁrst thought about this issue, I thought even the idea of a sharp 
boundary between the absence of phenomenal consciousness and contentless 
‘white noise’ was implicitly dualist and that a materialist should reject it:
It seems unbelievable, given materialism, that there could be some sharp 
threshold of entry to the conscious club— parents out, o!spring in, a sudden 
hatching of consciousness into the world— as the complexity of sen sori-
motor integration and global brain dynamics gradually increases. Such a 
threshold would seem arbitrary and inexplicable. Some form of dualism 
would be needed to explain it.I2
Yet I have come to doubt my own initial reaction. The idea of a ‘lights on’ 
moment is certainly a vivid way of introducing the idea of an explanatory gap 
between the mental and the physical. We picture an animal with no conscious 
I1 Birch et al. (2020b) outline a picture of this type.
I2 Birch (2021b, p. 121).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
