%HE ()N+(,)-+ .N/ %HE -N()N+(,)-+:  %HE (.+E )0 12,N/+,3H% 
45
managing uncertainty? Let’s continue our rapid progress, and we’ll know 
which systems are sentient and which are not by the time your framework has 
been implemented.’
To resist these strong optimists, I need to present a view of contemporary 
consciousness science and emotion science that may seem pessimistic. I am 
not, in fact, a pessimist about these areas at all, in absolute terms. I think sub-
stantial progress has been made in the last few decades. It is strong optimism 
about the science of consciousness or emotion— optimism that claims cer-
tainty to be within our grasp— that I see as misplaced. Indeed, not just mis-
placed but actually dangerous, if used as a reason to avoid talking about how 
to manage our uncertainty.
5.2 The Conscious and the Unconscious:  
The Case of Blindsight
I will start with the case of conscious visual experience. Conscious vision is 
not su6cient for sentience in the way I am using the term in this book, 
because I am using ‘sentience’ to refer to the capacity for valenced experience. 
In principle, a visual experience could be entirely without valence: it could 
feel neither good nor bad; it could feel completely neutral. So why start with 
vision? Because human consciousness science has intensively investigated the 
diﬀerence between conscious and unconscious vision for the best part of a 
century, leading to a rich body of evidence, detailed knowledge of the relevant 
pathways, and the best case for resolving disagreement. And yet we ﬁnd very 
little agreement regarding the neural basis of conscious visual experience. 
Why is this?
Let us go back about ﬁ7y years. It is hard to overstate the importance of the 
discovery of blindsight for the science of human consciousness. Blindsight 
can occur when a patient has damage to their primary visual cortex, V1, at the 
back of the brain. People with blindsight report seeing nothing whatsoever in 
a particular region of their visual ﬁeld, a region known as their blind ﬁeld or 
scotoma. Yet when a stimulus is presented in the blind ﬁeld, they can use vis-
ual information about that stimulus to perform at levels well above chance in 
tasks where they are forced to respond or choose between options.8 They can 
even sometimes navigate their way around obstacles that, according to their 
reports, they cannot consciously see at all. De Gelder and colleagues describe 
8 Ajina and Bridge (2017); Cowey (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
