%K4 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
realm of theory to agreement on a course of action. The ﬁrst is the concept of 
a sentience candidate:
A system S is a sentience candidate if there is an evidence base that:
(a)  implies a realistic possibility of sentience in S that it would be 
irresponsible to ignore when making policy decisions that will 
aﬀect S, and
(b)  is rich enough to allow the identiﬁcation of welfare risks and the 
design and assessment of precautions.
The concept of a sentience candidate is deﬁned in terms of possibilities it 
would be irresponsible to ignore, given current evidence. There is, inevitably, a 
value- judgement involved in declaring that evidence has amassed to a point 
at which it is now irresponsible to ignore it in practical contexts. Judging 
something to be a sentience candidate is not, therefore, a completely value- 
neutral exercise, nor could it be.
Yet it is also a judgement that must be informed by the scientiﬁc meta- 
consensus just described. We can appeal to the meta- consensus to explain 
why disconnected spinal cords, zygotes, neural and non- neural tissue sam-
ples, organs other than the brain, and unicellular organisms are not sentience 
candidates. One can speculate, in the seminar room, about sentience in these 
systems, but responsible precautionary actions cannot be based on these 
speculations. By contrast, at least some invertebrate animals belong in a very 
diﬀerent category. Because R3 and R5 are realistic possibilities, and both 
allow that functional analogues of sentience- relevant vertebrate brain areas 
(the neocortex and midbrain, respectively) may be su8cient for sentience, we 
need to get into the ﬁner details of the evidence concerning invertebrates in 
order to make assessments of their sentience candidature (and this is the task 
of Part IV of the book).
To judge a system to be a sentience candidate, then, involves scientiﬁc and 
evaluative components: like many other judgements that have to be made at 
the science- policy interface, it is a ‘mixed’ judgement.:I The concept captures 
a delicate threshold in our evidential and practical situation. When the 
threshold is crossed, a substantial enough evidence base exists to allow 
responsible discussion of possible precautionary actions.
:I For discussion of ‘mixed’ judgements, see Alexandrova (2018); Birch (2021a); Plutynski (2017).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
