2C2 
()ON,-.)/ O( 0)O0O),-ON12-,3
concern in its own right, regardless of whether one also sees it as having this 
broader resonance.
It would be reassuring to learn that animals at least die quickly when 
dropped into boiling water, or are rendered insensitive quickly, or do not feel 
the heat, but the evidence provides no support for these assumptions. There 
is some electrophysiological evidence of heat- sensitive nociceptors in the 
antennae of the crayﬁsh,13 and it is ecologically plausible that decapods would 
have such nociceptors, given that staying in water of a suitable temperature is 
a challenge they face in the wild. Fregin and Bickmeyer used electrophysio-
logical recording techniques to explore the nervous system’s response to 
immersion in boiling water, and found a storm of nervous activity that began 
at the moment of immersion and continued for well over a minute, and 
sometimes up to two and a half minutes.1? Roth and Øines also arrived at the 
ﬁgure of two and a half minutes by measuring the internal temperature of 
gradually heated crabs at the time they became unresponsive, and working 
backwards to the amount of time they would take to reach that critical tem-
perature in boiling water.15
We recommended in our 2021 report that live boiling without prior stun-
ning should be banned. It is important, at the same time, to face up to the 
need for more research into what it takes to stun a decapod crustacean eﬀ ect-
ive ly. The Fregin and Bickmeyer study that investigated live boiling also 
investigated the eﬀects of commercial stunning devices. They found that a 
leading brand of commercial stunner induced a seizure- like pattern of 
increased neural activity in lobsters and crayﬁsh, combined with an absence 
of behavioural responsiveness to mechanical stimulation lasting between ten 
and sixty minutes. They found that when crayﬁsh were dropped into boiling 
water a4er induction of the seizure- like state, the neural response was much 
reduced, relative to controls, but not completely abolished. Fregin and 
Bickmeyer summarized their ﬁndings as follows: ‘electrical stunning induces 
epileptiform seizures but paralyses the animals and leads to a reversible 
decline of nerve system activity a4er seizure.’
We do not know what this seizure- like neural activity induced by electrical 
stunning feels like from the animal’s point of view. We also do not know 
whether the state of unresponsiveness following the seizure- like event is an 
unconscious state. In our own case, diminished neural activity and behav-
ioural unresponsiveness are consistent with total anaesthesia (which does not 
13 Puri and Faulkes (2015).
1? Fregin and Bickmeyer (2016).
15 Roth and Øines (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
