TH.,, A2T,.(ATIV,4 
546
citizens are still political discussions. A9er all, di;erent values and ways of life 
are brought to the table, they come into conﬂict, and a shared way forward 
isJagreed.
Why should we want issues regarding sentience to be departisanized? For 
two main reasons. One is that these questions of proportionality in the face of 
risk (including other kinds of risk, such as public health risk and military 
risk) tend not to register as salient issues during election campaigns, which 
tend to focus instead on economic, ﬁscal, and social policies (e.g. tax rises, 
spending increases) that will have robust and immediate impacts on the 
popu la tion. Election campaigns inevitably bundle together many issues, with 
the result that there is little scrutiny of candidates’ positions on relatively non- 
central issues. As a result, elected representatives need not be responsive to 
the values of the voters on questions of proportionality in the face of risk. 
That is not a problem as such, because it is right for election campaigns to 
focus on the core policy platforms of the competing parties. It is, however, a 
reason for thinking responsive representation may not be the best kind of 
democratic representation to address these particular questions.
The second reason to departisanize is that political parties have a strong 
incentive to prioritize the interests of currently voting humans over the inter-
ests of all other beings. It is o9en remarked that the interests of prison popu-
la tions, children, immigrants without voting rights, and future generations 
are systematically neglected in democracies. The same is plausibly true of 
patients with chronic disorders of consciousness requiring long- term care. 
While their families may well vote in a way that reﬂects their interests (just as 
the families of prisoners might promote their interests), this group is too 
small and too geographically dispersed to register as a signiﬁcant electoral 
force. A similar point is even more obviously true of non- human animals, and 
will be at least initially true of any potentially sentient future AI systems.
Does this second reason also tell against citizens’ panels? If composed 
ofJhuman citizens, won’t they too have a tendency to neglect the interests of 
non- humans, and perhaps also those of small, marginalized groups of 
humans? That is an important issue I will take up in §7.4.
Referendums
A second alternative approach is to hold referendums on these issues. Like 
citizens’ panels, referendums can take an issue outside the scope of party pol-
it ics. The advantage of a referendum is that, by involving the entire electorate, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
