2GI 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
We need to begin in earnest a serious search for evidence of sentience in 
other molluscs and arthropods, along the lines of the evidence that already 
exists for cephalopods, decapods, and insects.
Insect Larvae
If adult insects are sentience candidates, what should we say about insect lar-
vae, such as mealworms and black soldier ﬂy larvae? We quickly run out of 
evidence when considering such questions. There is an urgent need to enrich 
the evidence base. To make the question even more diFcult, we should note 
that insect larvae pass through a series of stages known as instars before meta-
mor phosis, with each instar bookended by a skin- shedding event, and the 
brain is in a process of development throughout these instars. A mealworm will 
develop through between nine and twenty- four instars before meta mor phosis.;C 
A black soldier ﬂy larva will develop through six instars.6D What is true of 
:rst- instar larvae may not be true of sixth- instar larvae.
For Barron and Klein, the central complex is the part of the insect brain 
that is most directly relevant to questions of sentience, given its functional 
similarities to the vertebrate midbrain.61 An immature central complex is dis-
cernible in the brain of a third- instar Drosophila larva, which is the last stage 
before metamorphosis.62 But these brain structures, though identi:able in the 
larva, are greatly elaborated during metamorphosis. Unfortunately, we can-
not infer much about other insects from this, given the great variation in the 
number of instars between insect orders.
Evidence varies continuously in its strength, requiring judgement calls 
about when ‘thin’ shades into ‘too thin’. As we go down the ladder of instars, 
larvae bring us into the heart of the grey area. My own view is that, as in the 
case of gastropods and arachnids, we need more evidence to make evidence- 
based precautionary actions possible. In this type of case, taking a precau-
tionary attitude means seeing the burden as properly falling on the industry 
that wants to farm these animals to support the research needed to allow 
informed assessments of their sentience candidature (an idea revisited in the 
next chapter). The danger we must avoid is that of allowing the deliberate 
cultivation of pockets of ignorance. It is tempting to think ‘if the animals are 
;C Park et al. (2014).
6D Liu et al. (2019).
61 Barron and Klein (2016).
62 Young and Armstrong (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
