%K8 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
expression of a virtue (as on virtue ethics views). Second, there is dis agree ment 
about what constitutes a good reason for causing suﬀering. For some, there 
may be no reason good enough to justify causing suﬀering to an animal. For 
others, many reasons may be good enough, as long as they connect to important 
human values and interests. For example, many think that gaining biomedical 
knowledge can be a good enough reason.
What is the best way to formulate the consensus against gratuitous suﬀer-
ing? In the 1990s, the Christian theologian Michael Banner, then chair of the 
UK’s Animals in Science Committee, suggested some consensus principles 
o!en described as ‘Banner’s principles’:
1. harms of a certain degree and kind ought under no circumstances to be 
inAicted on an animal;
2. any harm to an animal, even if not absolutely impermissible, nonethe-
less requires justiﬁcation and must be outweighed by the good which is 
realistically sought in so treating it; and
3. any harm which is justiﬁed by the second principle ought, however, to 
be minimized as far as is reasonably possible.;:
Similar attempts at formulating consensus principles have occurred within 
debates about how to reconcile animal welfare with a liberal attitude of toler-
ance towards a wide range of cultures, including cultural practices that lead to 
welfare problems. In this context, Paula Casal has argued that consensus can 
form around the idea that ‘it is wrong to kill animals in painful ways when 
alternative less painful methods are available’;; and Chad Flanders has pro-
posed that ‘there is a tradition of history of laws against cruelty to animals in 
this country [the United States], so much so that it should count as a ﬁxed 
point in our reasoning about animals’.;B Most recently, in a detailed study of 
the place of other animals in political liberalism, Federico Zuolo has pro-
posed that consensus can form around the principle that ‘we ought to min im-
ize animal suﬀering in interactions with human beings as much as reasonably 
possible’.;C
These principles are undoubtedly very thin, in the sense that they do not 
strongly constrain human actions. They leave room for people to argue that 
low- welfare practices are practically necessary, given some legitimate aim 
(e.g. maintaining an economically viable meat production business). So, it 
;: Farm Animal Welfare Council (2009).
;; Casal (2003, p. 49).
;B Flanders (2014, p. 56).
;C Zuolo (2020, p. 211).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
