2))P,N3 1EY)N/ %HE :.::.2,.N (.+E 
5MH
eﬀects on autonomic arousal, such as sweating and increased heartrate. Both 
agree that work carefully mapping out the details of this circuit in rats has 
been extremely valuable. Moreover, both agree that this activity is typically 
‘re- represented’ in cortical areas, allowing the event to enter a wide range of 
other mechanisms, such as episodic memory.;; Both even endorse Tulving’s 
taxonomy of ‘autonoetic’ (self- knowing), ‘noetic’ (knowing), and ‘anoetic’ 
(non- knowing) consciousness to capture the diﬀerent grades of emotional 
experience.;5 The big disagreement is about whether subcortical mechanisms 
already su6ce for a simple, ‘anoetic’ valenced experience with or without any 
cortical involvement (Panksepp), or whether cortical re- representation is 
necessary for any kind of experience, no matter how simple (LeDoux).;6 At the 
point where they disagree, the evidence becomes tantalizingly inconclusive.
No one can claim to be certain, largely on the basis of aﬀective priming 
studies, that all midbrain- driven defensive responses of animals are uncon-
scious. That would be an example of unreasonable, dogmatic certainty. Yet it 
would also be unreasonable to claim certainty for the Panksepp view, largely 
on the basis of animal studies that show a causal relationship between mid-
brain mechanisms and behavioural responses without establishing that these 
mechanisms involve conscious experience. We need to remain open- minded 
about both possibilities.
5.6 Looking beyond the Mammalian Case
To date, the vast majority of research into both sensory and aﬀective con-
sciousness has concerned mammals. LeDoux’s experimental work exploring 
the functions of the amygdala was done on rats, as was Panksepp’s work 
exploring the functions of the hypothalamus and the eﬀects of decortication. 
For all their disagreement, the fact that subcortical circuits are substantially 
conserved right across the mammals, so that some inferences about humans 
can be drawn from the case of rats, is important to both. Their disagreement 
was always about the relevance of those subcortical circuits to questions of 
conscious experience.
;; Panksepp (2011, p. 1795).
;5 Tulving (1985, 2005); LeDoux (2021); Vandekerckhove (2021); Vandekerckhove and Panksepp 
(2011).
;6 LeDoux (2023) himself has reﬂected on his disagreements with Panksepp, arriving at the same 
conclusion.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
