540 
I(VO2VI() TH, 13B2I?
In pluralistic societies, we continually face problems of value conﬂict. 
When thinking about precautions against risks, we must consider the harms 
imposed by the proposed response and whether they are justiﬁed by the level 
of risk reduction they achieve. Informally: is the cure worse than the disease? 
Yet there is very o9en (perhaps always) no appropriate way to weigh the 
expected harms and beneﬁts in a common currency.
To give one example, discussed in Chapter 17: Thomas Metzinger has 
called for a moratorium on AI research that knowingly risks creating artiﬁcial 
sentience, not because of the risks to humanity, but because the risk of devel-
oping sentient AI that we expose to terrible su;ering is too great.A Is this pro-
portionate? On the harm side of the ledger, we forego potentially massive 
economic gains that could make human lives easier in many areas. On the 
beneﬁt side, we have the potential for preventing the su;ering of a new type 
of sentient being. In what common currency are these harms and beneﬁts to 
be compared?
In situations of value conﬂict, a threat arises that I call the ‘tyranny of 
expert values’. It is not that there is literally no way to resolve a conﬂict 
between disparate values: the real problem is that there are many ways, 
reﬂecting di;erent ways of weighting the values.B Experts o9en unintention-
ally build an implicit weighting into the advice they give. If this weighting is 
never brought to the surface and scrutinized by a democratic process, we 
have a problem of accountability.
One example of this phenomenon (unrelated to sentience) is the UK’s ini-
tial response to COVID- 19.C The school closures and national lockdown of 
March 2020 were driven by forthright advice from epidemiological advisers, 
who told the government that (to quote from published documents) a strat-
egy involving school closures ‘should be followed as soon as practical’,D that it 
was ‘the only viable strategy at the current time’,E and that ‘evidence now sup-
ports implementing school closures on a national level as soon as practicable 
to prevent NHS intensive care capacity being exceeded’.F
As critics noted, this strategy imposed a serious harm on schoolchildren, 
who are generally at very low risk of contracting severe COVID- 19, and were 
thought even in the early stages of the pandemic to be at very low risk.G These 
harms will have a legacy stretching far into the future. At the heart of the 
A Metzinger (2021).
B This is why I prefer the term ‘value conﬂict’ to ‘value incommensurability’, which is sometimes 
also used.
C Birch (2021a).
D SPI- M- O (2020).
E Ferguson et al. (2020).
F Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (2020a).
G Lewis et al. (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
