77: 
4E;,3L ­,234­/50
Proposal 14. Ethical review. When a neural organoid is a sentience 
candidate, research on it, if permitted at all, should be subject to ethical 
review and harm- beneﬁt analysis, modelled on existing frameworks for 
regulating research on sentient animals.
Ideally, I would like to see the same review boards considering both animal 
and organoid research, so that they are able to see the trade- oﬀs involved in 
the two kinds of research, to advise on cases that blur the boundaries between 
the two (because an organoid is implanted into an animal), and to advise 
replacing animals with organoids where appropriate. This would, however, 
require an expansion of the existing review boards and a boost to their 
resources, since a wider range of expertise would be required and a greater 
number of decisions would have to be made.
It would be controversial to bring a form of human tissue under regulations 
designed for animal research, for two reasons: we are talking about tissue and 
not about whole animals, and we are talking about human tissue, not the 
tissue of other animals. In both ways, the proposal involves extending a general 
regulatory approach outside the context for which it was originally devised. 
However, I see the problems here as problems of framing and wording, not deep 
problems. If ASPA were to be amended to include organoids, it would be wise to 
rename it. Politically, it may be easier to regulate organoid research using new 
legislation modelled on ASPA rather than through amending ASPA itself.
I see both of the above options— an indeﬁnite ban or moratorium targeted 
at speciﬁc types of organoid, and a regulatory framework modelled on ASPA 
and centred on the idea of harm- beneﬁt analysis— as options worthy of ser ious 
discussion. Which option we take depends on broader evaluative questions 
about the value we see, as a society, in this research, relative to the disvalue of 
the risks. We may also want to use both options in relation to diﬀerent types 
of neural organoid, regulating research on some, banning research on others. 
I doubt there will be a one- size- ﬁts- all solution, and for now I want to put both 
proposals on the table as options that should be debated further.
Proposal 13. Targeted bans. If organoid research leads to the creation of 
organoids that are sentience candidates, a moratorium (time- limited ban) 
or indeﬁnite ban on the creation of this particular type of organoid may be 
an appropriate response. Bans should avoid indiscriminate targeting of all 
organoid research.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
