5MI 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
In the study of conscious vision, meanwhile, primates have always been the 
main focus, due to the substantial similarities in the visual system across all 
primates. The ﬁrst evidence of blindsight came not from humans but from 
macaques.;7 Indeed, for around ﬁ7y years now, research into naturally occur-
ring cases of blindsight in humans has proceeded in tandem with research 
into induced blindsight in monkeys, where experimenters deliberately create 
lesions in the visual cortex.;A Moreover, non- invasive (and so strongly prefer-
able) techniques for dissociating the conscious from the unconscious, such as 
backward masking of stimuli, can also be used with macaques.;B This research 
programme has never been successfully extended to rats or mice, despite the 
strong incentives to do this if possible. Rats and mice are simply much less 
visual creatures— olfaction is their primary means of exploring their 
environment— and their visual system diﬀers from that of primates in ways 
that have so far obstructed the development of masking techniques or the 
generation of blindsight- like behaviours.
The result is that, in the case of conscious vision, we ﬁnd theories shaped 
mainly by evidence from primates; and in emotion research, we ﬁnd theories 
shaped by evidence from a wider range of mammals, but chieﬂy rats. In both 
ﬁelds, precious little research has been done on non- mammals. But we do 
know this much: the neocortex, with its distinctive six- layer organization, is a 
mammalian brain structure, normally present in all mammals (when they have 
not been decorticated by researchers) but not present in any non- mammal.
In birds, a region called the pallium seems to serve analogous functions to 
the neocortex.5C The avian pallium does not have the layered structure of the 
neocortex: it has a nucleated structure. But there are functional analogies 
between regions of the two structures. Recent work has highlighted the 
potential importance of a region called the nidopallium caudolaterale (NCL), 
hypothesized to be an analogue of the prefrontal cortex in mammals. In 2020, 
a study by Andreas Nieder and colleagues recorded neural activity in the 
NCL of carrion crows (Corvus corone), revealing that NCL activation pre-
dicted whether or not the birds would ‘report’ having seen a near- threshold 
visual stimulus.51
What I found most extraordinary about this study was the ‘reporting’. Over 
tens of thousands of trials, the birds were trained to ‘report’ the stimulus 
;7 The story is recounted engagingly by Nicholas Humphrey in the early chapters of his book 
Sentience (2022).
;A Cowey (2010).
;B Ben- Haim et al. (2021).
5C Güntürkün and Bugnyar (2016).
51 Nieder et al. (2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
