2E( 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
Nematode Worms
The nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans is a famous model organism 
with fewer than four hundred neurons. Nematodes have a nerve ring in the 
head, containing around 185 neurons. Researchers are increasingly comfort-
able describing this neuropil as a brain despite its extraordinarily diminutive 
size (recall, for comparison, that some decapods have around half a million 
neurons in the two hemiellipsoid bodies alone, and that some human neural 
organoids have around a million neurons).96 This minute brain performs 
various integrative functions (including both sensorimotor and multisensory 
integration), supports learning and decision- making, and displays global 
brain dynamics and a form of sleep- wake cycle.97
Indeed, Liz Irvine has argued that C. elegans satis:es many of our proposed 
pain criteria.9B For example, C. elegans displays a simple form of trade- oﬀ 
behaviour. Presented with a situation in which it has to cross an aversive, des-
iccating surface to reach the source of an attractive odour, the worm will not 
cross the barrier unless it is suFciently hungry. Through a mechanism already 
mapped out at the neural level, hunger inhibits threat detection: as it gets 
hungrier, the worm becomes less and less sensitive to dessication.9C
We are not in a position to rule out sentience in C. elegans. The science of 
consciousness has not developed to a point where we can con:dently declare 
that any nervous system is ‘too small’ to support sentience. Moreover, if they 
did indeed display many of our pain criteria, I would support their classi:ca-
tion as sentience candidates. I would not see this as some kind of reductio ad 
absurdum of the proposed criteria, since I do not think there are any animals 
it would be absurd to regard as sentient.
However, I am quite sceptical of the claim that they do satisfy our criteria 
(beyond criterion 1, concerning nociception). To focus on the case of mo tiv-
ation al trade- oﬀs: the marker that raises the probability of sentience is not 
just ﬂexible behaviour, which is ubiquitous in the animal kingdom, but the 
evaluative representation of risks and opportunities, allowing these risks and 
opportunities to be anticipated and weighed. When hermit crabs trade- oﬀ 
electric shock voltage against shell quality, it seems at least one of these vari-
ables (shell quality) must be somehow represented by the crab rather than 
96 Brittin et al. (2021).
97 See Kaplan et al. (2018) on sensorimotor integration; Ghosh et al. (2017) on multisensory inte-
gration; Amano and Maruyama (2011) on learning; Kato et al. (2015) on global brain dynamics; and 
Lawler et al. (2021) on sleep.
9B E. Irvine (2020).
9C Ghosh et al. (2016).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
