/:KK03G 6T .,0LTE3 U 
)9
these traditions and their ways of thinking about sentience: it is not an 
optional add- on. We should not pretend otherwise. Importantly, though, 
people can end up agreeing on similar actions for very diﬀerent reasons: 
 reasons internal to their particular worldviews. This is what is happening, for 
example, when Jains and Western animal lovers converge on the importance 
of vegetarianism.
4.7 Summary of Chapter 4
Chapter 2 highlighted a convergence across classical utilitarianism, Korsgaard’s 
neo- Kantianism, and Nussbaum’s capabilities approach regarding the ethical 
signiﬁcance of sentience. These ‘sentientist’ outlooks can be contrasted with 
those that deny the necessity and/or suﬃciency of sentience for moral standing.
The clash between sentientist and biocentrist/ecocentrist positions is easily 
overstated: reasonable versions of these views will grant some signiﬁcance to 
sentience, while insisting that other ecological properties such as biodiversity 
also matter. Meanwhile, the possibility of Vulcan- like beings who have the 
consciousness aspect of sentience without the valence aspect suggests a quali-
ﬁcation to a pure sentientism may be needed. This qualiﬁcation may matter 
in the future (if we develop conscious but valence- free AI) but has little 
immediate signiﬁcance.
A more serious challenge to sentientism comes from agency- centric and 
rationality- centric positions. An example of the latter is orthodox Kantianism, 
which allows only indirect duties (formally owed to ourselves) concerning 
non- rational sentient beings. The need to bring rationality- centric viewpoints 
with us places a limit on how ambitious we can be when looking for ethical 
consensus.
Another challenge comes from the Abrahamic religions, which give only 
very limited moral standing to non- human sentient beings. We can, however, 
ﬁnd in all of them support for duties of stewardship, including the duty to 
avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering. Indian religions, by contrast, share im port-
ant elements of the sentientist outlook, though they have reached these over-
lapping conclusions by a very diﬀerent path.
The Edge of Sentience: Risk and Precaution in Humans, Other Animals, and AI. Jonathan Birch, Oxford University Press. 
© Jonathan Birch 2024. DOI: 10.1093/9780191966729.003.0005
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
