M6A 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
10.8 Summary of Chapter 10
In the 1980s, growing public awareness that anaesthesia was not routinely 
being used on newborn babies during surgery led to a successful campaign to 
change clinical practice, vindicated by subsequent evidence. The story shows 
us the value of taking a precautionary attitude towards existing evidence and 
the value of involving the public in discussion of general clinical norms.
When we turn to fetuses, a concern arises that recognizing fetal sentience 
may be incompatible with recognizing a right to abortion. However, these are 
substantially separate issues. The time limit for abortions depends either on 
when the fetus becomes a person and/or on the strength of a person’s right to 
bodily autonomy. Sentience is not suJcient for personhood, so this is not 
fundamentally a question about sentience.
We should recognize human fetuses as sentience candidates from the start 
of the second trimester. This aligns with the earliest scientiﬁcally credible, 
evidence- based estimates in the zone of reasonable disagreement. Future evi-
dence could move the threshold for sentience candidature in either direction, 
but it should always align with the earliest scientiﬁcally credible, evidence- 
based estimate.
Whenever therapeutic surgery is performed on a fetus (and this happens 
for a variety of reasons), direct administration of anaesthesia and pain relief 
should be considered. This can be justiﬁed by the need to control the fetal 
stress response, even setting aside the possibility of sentience. Speciﬁc deci-
sions need to be made by expert anaesthesiologists in discussion with sur-
geons and patients, but the public can and should be involved in discussions 
of the general norms of medical practice in this area and the value- judgements 
implicit in those norms.
Although recognizing second- trimester fetuses as sentience candidates 
does not give us a reason to change the legal time limit on abortions, it does 
require honest communication of uncertainty with patients. Clinical norms 
in this area need to be formulated by appropriately inclusive processes, and 
these processes need to give appropriate weight to the voices of women.
The anti- precautionary attitude that has sometimes been taken towards 
neonates and fetuses can be contrasted with the strongly precautionary atti-
tude ofen taken towards human embryo research, encapsulated in the 
‘ 14- day rule’. The original rationale for the 14- day rule (in the UK) rests on 
the dubious idea that the development of an individual human being begins 
with the appearance of the primitive streak. In practice, this has always repre-
sented a strategic compromise between deeply conﬂicting values, and the 
conﬂict has never been satisfactorily resolved.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
