./) 1)A24/ 3O2 4OG5-.-J)-;O.O2 0-11O4-A.-O5 
%77
fMRI, and EEG techniques ‘whenever feasible’ and has proposed that patients 
should be diagnosed as having the ‘highest level’ of consciousness indicated 
by behaviour, PET/fMRI neuroimaging, or EEG.11
I do not want to underplay the promise of these approaches. However, two 
notes of caution are important. The 8rst is that any technique with high spe-
ci 8 city (a low rate of false positives) is likely to have low sensitivity (a high 
rate of false negatives). Given the absence of consensus regarding which brain 
mechanisms are relevant to conscious experience and why (see Chapter 5), it 
is inherently very diﬃcult to tell whether a patient’s brain activity indicates 
residual conscious experience. The clearest signs come in situations where we 
have set a relatively demanding cognitive task (a high bar) and received an 
unambiguous signal. In a celebrated example, a group led by Adrian Owen 
asked patients to imagine playing tennis if the answer to a question was ‘yes’ 
and to imagine walking round their home if the answer was ‘no’. These two 
imaginative activities involve di!erent brain regions, yielding easily dis cern-
ible fMRI signatures in healthy controls. A healthy adult in an fMRI scanner 
is therefore able to answer the experimenter’s questions through voluntary 
mental activity alone. Owen and colleagues showed, astonishingly, that an 
outwardly unresponsive patient was able to answer questions just as unam-
biguously and accurately as the healthy controls. In follow- up work, they 
found more examples.12
Note, however, that this technique places signi8cant demands on the 
patient. Firstly, they need to be moved to an fMRI scanner, a process oAen 
inappropriate for a patient in a critical condition in an intensive care unit 
(ICU) following traumatic brain injury. Secondly, they need to be able to 
hear and process the questions and formulate an intentional response. The 
cognitive demands of this task could exceed the abilities of some covertly 
conscious patients. They might have problems with attention, language pro-
cessing, or intentional command- following that impede correct responding 
without abolishing experience. For these reasons, we should not expect such 
techniques to be well suited to frequent use in the ICU, nor should we expect 
them to be very sensitive.19
A range of other approaches have sought to increase sensitivity and ease 
of bedside use. We should, however, expect these techniques to come with 
a corresponding loss of speci8city: a greater risk of false positives. In 2019, 
11 Kondziella et al. (2020).
12 Monti et al. (2010); Owen et al. (2006).
19 A.DPeterson et al. (2015).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
