,-. 643,6,H,. BF O.56/10 .,-6/3 P6O.Q /26,.261 
)43
behavioural, and cognitive criteria has been more widely in:uential on the 
ﬁeld, with many previous reviews being structured around either the same 
list of indicators or an expanded or modiﬁed version of it.33
In any such list, no single criterion is a smoking gun, conclusive proof of 
sentience. Equally, no single criterion is a sine qua non, whereby sentience is 
conclusively ruled out by its absence. We are not in an area where conclusive 
proof is available. The idea is rather that each criterion should be a piece of 
relevant evidence. Each one should shif probabilities. Its presence should 
raise the probability of sentience; its conﬁrmed absence should lower the 
probability. The criteria are intended to relate to sentience as symptoms relate 
to a disease. The more symptoms you have, the more likely it is that you have 
the disease.
33 Andrews et al (2013); Feinberg and Mallatt (2016); Sneddon et al. (2014); Varner (2012).
Box 12.1 The 1991 IME criteria for sentience (focused on 
the case of pain)
1. Possession of receptors sensitive to noxious stimuli, located in func-
tionally useful positions on or in the body, and connected by nervous 
pathways to the lower parts of a central nervous system.
2. Possession of brain centres which are higher in the sense of level of 
integration of brain processing (especially a structure analogous to the 
human cerebral cortex).
3. Possession of nervous pathways connecting the nociceptive system to 
the higher brain centres.
4. Receptors for opioid substances found in the central nervous system, 
especially the brain.
5. Analgesics modify an animal’s response to stimuli that would be pain-
ful for a human.
6. An animal’s response to stimuli that would be painful for a human is 
functionally similar to the human response (that is, the animal 
responds so as to avoid or minimize damage to its body).
7. An animal’s behavioural response persists, and it shows an unwilling-
ness to resubmit to a painful procedure; the animal can learn to asso-
ciate apparently non- painful with apparently painful events.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
