%M9 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
person to reject precautionary principles in all other contexts (climate change, 
environmental regulation, public health, and so on) but still accept this one.
This is because the justiﬁcation I have given does not take a ‘top- down’ 
form. The argument is not: precautionary principles are generally wise, this is 
an instance of a precautionary principle, therefore it too is wise. Rather, 
I have aimed to oﬀer a ‘bottom- up’ justiﬁcation that starts from a consensus 
about our duties towards other sentient beings, namely that we have a duty to 
avoid gratuitous suﬀering. Granting that we have such a duty, we must ﬁnd a 
way of applying that duty to cases where we are uncertain about whether a 
being is sentient or not. My proposal is that we can satisfy our duty by taking 
proportionate steps to control the risk of causing suﬀering whenever a being 
is a sentience candidate.
The framework is intended to cover all cases at the edge of sentience. This 
is a diverse family. It will soon be time to leave behind the general level and 
step down to the level of details. As an intermediate step towards discussing 
particular cases, however, we ﬁrst need to get into detail about how an 
informed, inclusive, democratic process for assessing proportionality could 
actually work.
6.7 Summary of Chapter 6
This chapter has sought points of consensus across the zone of reasonable 
disagreement. To do this, it introduced two crucial bridging concepts: sen-
tience candidates and investigation priorities. The key idea is that the zone of 
reasonable disagreement is wide, but not so wide as to preclude a meta- 
consensus about what it takes to be a sentience candidate. Of particular rele-
vance to later chapters is that the relatively inclusive theories of Panksepp, 
Damasio, and Merker, which link sentience to evolutionarily ancient mech-
an isms in the midbrain, describe realistic possibilities, so a system with these 
mechanisms is a sentience candidate. When the evidence falls short of show-
ing that a system is a sentience candidate, but there are still welfare risks that 
may call for a precautionary response, the system should be classed as an 
investigation priority.
There is, moreover, an ethical consensus around a duty to, at minimum, 
avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering to sentient beings. Suﬀering is not gra tuit-
ous if it occurs in the course of a defensible activity despite proportionate 
attempts to prevent it. Suﬀering is gratuitous if the activity is indefensible or 
the precautions taken fall short of what is proportionate.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
