)CK 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
handled this complex picture by reporting ‘low conﬁdence’ that penaeid 
shrimps have functional, integrative brain regions. It was a diﬃcult case, 
because the immunostaining work shows that whiteleg shrimp do have 
 homologues of such regions, while also casting doubt on their functionality.
A similar integrative centre linked to learning and memory— the mush-
room body— is well documented in insects. Indeed, Strausfeld et al. used their 
results to argue for the homology of the insect mushroom body and the deca-
pod hemiellipsoid body. The evidence for sentience in decapods cannot, 
therefore, be disentangled from the emerging picture of insects as sentience 
candidates, an issue that will be picked up in the next chapter.
12.9 From Grades of Evidence to Sharp Decisions
Our review lef us with a complicated, gradated picture. Comparative judge-
ments are easier than absolute ones. The evidence for sentience in octopuses 
is stronger than the evidence in any of the other taxa we reviewed. The evi-
dence for sentience in coleoid cephalopods (octopuses, squid, cuttleﬁsh) is 
stronger the evidence for sentience in nautiluses. The evidence for sentience 
in the Pleocyemata (the suborder of the decapods that includes all the walk-
ing decapods, plus caridean shrimps, but excluding penaeid shrimps) is 
stronger than the evidence for sentience in Dendrobranchiata (the suborder 
including penaeid shrimps).
However, these comparative claims are at least partly a re:ection of where 
scientists have chosen to direct their attention. They do not re:ect a settled 
picture obtained through careful, detailed investigation of all the taxa in 
question. The Dendrobranchiata, in particular, have barely been studied in 
relation to sentience. Moreover, these comparative claims do not give 
policy- makers direct guidance.
It was not easy to move from this complex picture to a simple recommen-
dation. In my view, it is clear that the coleoid cephalopods (octopuses, squid, 
cuttleﬁsh) are sentience candidates, and clear too that the decapods of the 
suborder Pleocyemata are sentience candidates, but there is very little evi-
dence concerning shrimps of the suborder Dendrobranchiata (as our tables 
conveyed). In the terminology of this book, Dendrobranchiata are investiga-
tion priorities rather than sentience candidates: we currently lack an adequate 
evidence base for designing precautions and need to enrich that evidence 
base urgently.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
