HUDA. (D4/0-B A.C TH( PQ-CA0 /U1( 
MN7
149days as the time at which implantation would normally be complete.55 The 
implicit rationale was (I suspect) that research on embryos should have the 
goal of facilitating IVF treatments, and only pre- implantation embryos were 
deemed relevant to this goal. The Warnock report, meanwhile, gives the reason 
that, at 15 days, the ‘primitive streak’ develops. The primitive streak is a transient 
developmental structure with important roles in organizing development.56 The 
structure imparts bilateral symmetry and an anterior- posterior body axis or, in 
plain terms, gives the embryo a ‘head end’ and a ‘foot end’. Signiﬁcantly for the 
committee’s reasoning, normal identical twinning cannot occur afer this point.5? 
The committee thus concluded that the primitive streak ‘marks the beginning of 
individual development of the embryo’.58
Why should the point at which normal identical twinning can no longer 
occur mark an ethically signiﬁcant threshold? The oddity of this idea is part 
of what makes the Warnock report, to my mind, a fascinatingly strange piece 
of advisory writing. Metaphysics rears its head in an unexpected place. At 
face value, the report’s recommendations rest on an idiosyncratic meta phys-
ic al picture that is far from common ground. This is the most charitable 
reconstruction of the argument I can come up with:
1. An embryo has moral status if and only if it could be the initial stage of 
an individual human being.
2. In a case of identical twinning, the initial stage of each individual must 
have been no earlier than the moment of twinning.
3. The stage in development at which an individual begins is always the 
same. It cannot diﬀer between twinned and non- twinned cases.
4. Therefore: an embryo has moral status if and only if it has developed 
past the latest stage in development at which twinning occurs.
This is a remarkably shaky foundation on which to rest such a grave recom-
mendation. All the premises are dubious. We need not accept that moral sta-
tus is tied to the possibility of being the initial stage of a human individual. 
Moreover, we need not accept that each identical twin began no earlier than 
the moment of twinning (we could adopt a picture in which both individuals 
55 HEW Ethics Advisory Board (1979). Their estimate was incorrect: implantation occurs 12 days 
afer fertilization at the latest (Wilcox et al. 1999).
56 Downs (2009).
5? Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology (1984, §11.15). Conjoined 
twinning can still occur, however (Blackshaw and Rodger 2021). It is not always clear what to say 
about individuality in conjoined twin cases (Boyle 2020).
58 Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology (1984, §11.22).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
