./,2C1,: 1-2 2?270./0 /2W P.C1U72 
2(A
We consider that the experimental biologist would be advised to follow, 
whenever feasible, Wigglesworth’s recommendation that insects have their 
nervous systems inactivated prior to traumatizing manipulation. This pro-
ced ure not only facilitates handling, but also guards against the remaining 
possibility of pain inﬂiction and, equally important, helps to preserve in the 
experimenter an appropriately respectful attitude towards living organisms 
whose physiology, though diﬀerent, and perhaps simpler than our own, is as 
yet far from completely understood.B
All of these authors, then, were willing to accept that insects might yet be 
sentient despite failing to respond to injury in the way a mammal would. An 
insect could, in principle, have a system of locally controlled responses to tis-
sue damage that occur autonomously of the brain, yet the brain could still be 
engaged in rich evaluative modelling of the risks and opportunities in its 
environment, experiencing frustrations and rewards in the form of aﬀect. 
These would be valenced experiences regardless of whether we call them 
‘pleasure’ and ‘pain’ or something else.
13.2 Insects: The Emerging New Picture
New evidence is changing the way we think about insects. Multiple diﬀerent 
lines of evidence are relevant here. One consists of studies of insect nocicep-
tion, which have vindicated Wigglesworth’s suggestion about heat. 
Nociceptive pathways responding to intense heat have been studied in 
Drosophila larvaeC and in cockroaches.1D Yet nociception is not pain, and the 
mere presence of nociceptors, although a relevant piece of evidence, does not 
shif probabilities very much, just as the mere presence of photoreceptors is 
not compelling evidence of conscious vision. It just shows that a basic pre-
requis ite for pain is in place.
Potentially more signi:cant is emerging evidence from bees suggesting that 
they are able to trade oﬀ the anticipated value of a reward against the risk of 
injury. This type of behaviour, when found in hermit crabs, has been taken 
as  evidence of sentience, since it indicates a central evaluation system 
B Eisemann et al. (1984, p. 167). The emphasis on the ‘appropriately respectful attitude’ of the 
experimenter is reminiscent of Knutsson and Munthe (2017) on the ‘virtue of precaution’.
C Burgos et al. (2018).
1D Emanuel and Libersat (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
