PN6/1, 6/5 U/.C2NNUN67 4706/.,?, 
2GJ
capable of suﬀering, better not to know about it’, but a precautionary attitude 
requires the opposite view.
In such territory, we are on :rmer ground making comparative claims. We 
have very little evidence about the emergence of sentience in development, 
but the adult is more likely to be sentient than the larva. And later instars, 
closer to metamorphosis, are more likely to be sentient than earlier instars. It 
does not follow, though, that we should therefore slaughter the larvae at the 
earliest economically viable time point, since that might result in far more 
individual animals being farmed to produce the same amount of protein (as 
they would be smaller at the point of slaughter), potentially leading to more 
suﬀering overall, if those larvae turn out to be sentient.
13.5 Neither Sentience Candidates nor Investigation 
Priorities: Plants and Unicellular Organisms
Some believe there is evidence of sentience in plants.68 I grant that there is 
abundant evidence of remarkable developmental plasticity in plants.69 
Watching a bean shoot develop in time- lapse is fascinating and spectacular. 
Likewise, there is remarkable developmental plasticity in animals, and watch-
ing any animal embryo develop in time- lapse is fascinating and spectacular. It 
is an astonishing feat of chemical and bioelectric signalling, coordination, 
and diﬀerential gene expression.6; It is very natural to talk metaphorically of 
an animal or plant making ‘decisions’ or ‘choices’ as it develops.
In the animal case, however, it is generally accepted that developmental 
plasticity is not evidence of sentience. Discovering that animals of a given 
clade (placozoans, for example) display impressive plasticity does not raise 
the probability that they are sentient. This is because, in the animal case, we 
know that sentience is a complex product of development, not something that 
guides it. Granted, humans have created rare exceptions: we can consciously 
choose to take drugs such as testosterone that will aﬀect our developmental 
trajectory. But these are exceptions that prove the rule, as it were, because it 
takes all of our technological ingenuity to exert the tiniest degree of inﬂuence. 
Animal development is not normally guided by conscious choice.
68 See Calvo and Lawrence (2022); Segundo- Ortin and Calvo (2023). This section draws on Birch 
(2023b).
69 West- Eberhard (2003).
6; Levin (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
