%74 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
non- induced, and they are usually acute states, lasting a few weeks at most. 
Chronic comas lasting longer than a few weeks are possible but very rare.
In the vegetative state, there are sleep- wake cycles and there are some 
responses to stimuli and spontaneous behaviours, but there is no sign that the 
responses go beyond re7exes or that the spontaneous behaviours are under 
voluntary control. A patient in this condition has periods of wakefulness in 
which they may spontaneously evince smiles, grimaces, grunts, groans, rov-
ing eye movements, teeth- grinding, chewing, and apparently purposeless 
bodily movements. They may also react to stimuli by, for example, withdraw-
ing a limb from a noxious stimulus or grimacing in response to noise. Their 
eyes may follow a moving object or orient to the source of a loud noise, but 
only 7eetingly.
The vegetative state contrasts with the minimally conscious state, in which 
some signs of voluntary action do appear, though inconsistently. This con-
struct is now split into two subcategories: minus and plus. In the minimally 
conscious state minus (MCS−), the patient shows non- linguistic voluntary 
behaviours, such as 8xating on and following a moving visual target for a 
sustained period, or targeting behaviours at speci8c locations (the RCP 
guidance gives the examples of targeted scratching and pulling a bed sheet). 
They may also react to noxious stimuli in ways that seem to go beyond 
re7exes, such as by targeting their response at the site of the stimulus. In the 
minimally conscious state plus (MCS+), a patient is likely to show all these 
non- verbal signs but, in addition, shows signs of language processing and/
or understanding of their surroundings. They may, for example, follow sim-
ple commands, use some objects appropriately, or answer questions with 
yes/no signals.
I want to pause here to re7ect on terminology and on the stigma that some-
times attaches to these conditions. ‘Vegetative state’ is a problematic term, 
partly because it seems to exclude the possibility of conscious experience in a 
way that may be hasty (see §9.2) but also because it is semantically much too 
close to the o!ensive term ‘vegetable’. This has led to a call to replace the term 
with ‘unresponsive wakefulness syndrome’.9 But these patients are not fully 
unresponsive, as already noted. No one has yet found a fully satisfactory way 
out of this terminological mine8eld. The term ‘vegetative state’ is still widely 
used, so I will use that term here, despite being no fan of it. I will tend to say 
‘VS’, or, for the persistent vegetative state, ‘PVS’.
9 Laureys et al. (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
