%K4 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
Proposal 2. Assume sentient (general). A patient who is displaying 
sleep- wake cycles should not be assumed incapable of experience when an 
important clinical decision is made. All clinical decisions should consider 
the patient’s best interests as comprehensively as possible, working on the 
precautionary assumption that there is a realistic possibility of valenced 
experience and a continuing interest in avoiding su!ering and in achieving a 
state of well- being, but without taking this assumption to have implications 
regarding prognosis.
Proposal 3. Avoid line- drawing (general). The diagnostic categories of 
PVS, MCS−, and MCS+ should be phased out in therapeutic and legal 
contexts. Clinicians should work with the broader category of ‘prolonged 
disorder of consciousness’ (PDOC) and with pro8les of individual patients, 
tailoring care to the patient’s individual needs.
9.6 The Question of Treatment Withdrawal
This section will be diﬃcult to read, perhaps especially if one has experience 
of relevant cases, but also if one does not. We must nonetheless be willing to 
confront the issues it raises.
Many of us would not want to be sustained inde8nitely with a severe dis order 
of consciousness, unable to move purposefully or communicate with anyone 
around us. It is, we should admit, very hard to imagine what it would be like to 
be in such a state, and those who are in the state cannot tell us directly. For some, 
it may be mostly painless, and may involve some positive well- being.2H There is 
likely to be great variation along many dimensions in what it is like to have a 
disorder of consciousness, including variation in levels of well- being, and we are 
currently very limited in our ability to measure that variation.9I
Yet the risk of su!ering if consciousness persists is very clear. The conse-
quences for one’s family are also foreseeable. The RCP describes the ‘huge 
stress’ and ‘prolonged and exhausting rollercoaster of emotions and ricochet-
ing between fear and hope’ typically experienced by the patient’s family 
across many years.91 Many of us would not want our families to have to 
endure this. Many of us may therefore make a considered judgement, in our 
current state, that to live like this for years would not be in our best interests.
2H Graham (2017, 2021); Graham and Naci (2021).
9I Bayne et al. (2016).
91 Royal College of Physicians (2020, p. 82).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
