A-1, A. FBH45, 64 B26.F 
)CC
driving reduced exploratory behaviour, a state experimentally manipulable 
with serotonin and chlordiazepoxide. They described this state as ‘anxiety- 
like’.7( The presence of ‘anxiety- like’ states is not conclusive proof of experi-
ences of anxiety. We nonetheless took it to be a relevant piece of evidence 
(under criterion 4b).
Example 3: Integrative Brain Regions Linked to Learning 
and Memory
Integrative brain regions linked to learning and memory raise the probability 
of sentience. Even those who favour theories of sentience on which its func-
tion has no relation to learning and memory (or on which it has no function 
at all) should acknowledge this as a criterion motivated by several well- 
developed and credible theories in the zone of reasonable disagreement.
The integrative functions of the vertical lobe in coleoid ceph alo pods are 
well documented, and their impressive learning abilities have long been cele-
brated.77 But what about decapods? There is good behavioural evidence that 
at least some decapod crustaceans can learn associatively. The evidence is 
particularly strong for true crabs (infraorder Brachyura), though there is also 
some evidence of associative learning in lobsters (Astacidea and Achelata). 
It is tempting to think: if the animal can learn associatively, there must be 
some central association unit. However, we have already noted that simple, 
limited forms of associative learning can be performed by the spinal cords of 
rats, disconnected from the brain. Given this, we considered it important to 
ﬁnd evidence of dedicated brain regions that might plausibly be the main site 
for a central association unit.
Do decapods have such regions? I have sometimes heard people say that 
decapods lack brains: this re:ects either a misunderstanding of the relevant 
neurobiology or an excessively narrow deﬁnition of ‘brain’. What is true is 
that decapods have small brains in comparison with mammals. For example, 
the giant robber crab or coconut crab is the world’s largest terrestrial  
arthropod, with some individuals weighing up to 4 kg. A detailed study of the 
7( Fossat et al. (2014). A follow- up study showed a positive correlation between the amount of 
serotonin in the brain and the degree of light avoidance (a relationship, but a mirror image of the 
relationship in vertebrates, where serotonin decreases anxiety), and again showed that administering 
chlordiazepoxide abolished the light avoidance (Fossat et al. 2015). A third, in which light avoidance 
behaviour was induced by aggression from another animal, led to similar ﬁndings (Bacqué- Cazenave 
et al. 2017).
77 Shigeno et al. (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
