)0 
ET,-./ 012 3E4-5-61
for phenomenal consciousness alone is enough and that a capacity for 
valenced experience is not needed?A
At least in principle, there can be phenomenal consciousness without 
valence: experiences that feel like something but feel neither bad nor good. It 
is not clear that humans can have such experiences (our overall conscious 
state arguably always contains an element of mood). But we can conceive of a 
being that has a subjective point of view on the world in which non- valenced 
states feature (it consciously experiences shapes, colours, sounds, odours, 
etc.) but in which everything is evaluatively neutral. Such a being would be 
technically non- sentient according to the deﬁnition we have been using, 
though it would be sentient in a broader sense. Would such a being have the 
same moral standing as a being with valenced experiences?
Vulcans are sometimes discussed in this context.B The original Vulcans in 
Star Trek are not wholly without valenced experiences, but we can conceive 
of a ‘philosophical Vulcan’ in which valenced experience is dialled down to 
nothing, leaving conscious but valence- free perceptual experience, conscious 
thought, imagination, and episodic memory in place. Carruthers discusses 
such a being, which he names ‘Phenumb’.C Intuitively, a philosophical 
Vulcan has morally signiﬁcant interests: it would be wrong to destroy such 
a being for no reason at all. Moreover, it seems intuitively wrong to give 
lower priority to its interests than to those of a human simply because of its 
dialled- down valence.
In opposition to this line of thought, Andrew Lee suggests the example of 
an animal that experiences a maximally simple non- valenced experience, 
such as an experience of slight brightness.1D Ginsburg and Jablonka’s ‘white 
noise’, mentioned in Chapters 2 and 3, is a similar example. Is the presence of 
conscious experiences of slight brightness, or white noise, enough to justify 
giving higher moral priority to the animal’s interests, relative to those of a 
behaviourally similar but white- noise- free animal? Plausibly, it is not.
Can we reconcile the con9icting intuitions elicited by these cases? I think so. 
What the philosophical Vulcan shows us, I suggest, is that morally signiﬁcant 
interests can, in principle, arise independently of valence. An autonomous 
rational being capable of re9ectively endorsing goals and projects has such 
A My discussion of this issue is based on Birch (2022a).
B For example by Chalmers, quoted in Wiblin et al. (2019), by Roelofs (2023), and by Shepherd 
(in press). Shepherd sees philosophical Vulcans as calling into question the necessity of consciousness 
or sentience for moral status, since some have the intuition that the Vulcan would still have moral 
status even if wholly non- conscious (though cf. Kriegel in press).
C Carruthers (2005, ch. 9).
1D Lee (2019). See also Shepherd (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
