2L( B,.6-.)- C()CE/23 
%KM
will come to light in favour of a more inclusive, but currently highly  speculative, 
view. And so, a biopsychist can sign up to the proposed meta- consensus, 
provided they can recognize the speculative nature of their own views.
Objections may also come from the orthodox materialist side. We noted in 
Chapter 3 that a certain type of materialist— a ‘many- kinds’ materialist— is 
rather suspicious of terms like ‘sentience’ in the ﬁrst place, thinking it likely 
that they merely gesture in the direction of several diﬀerent cognitive/neuro-
biological kinds. Such a person will expect the term ‘sentient being’ to give 
way eventually to a family of more precise successor notions. They may see 
many diﬀerent theoretical views in the R1–R5 space as identifying genuinely 
relevant kinds (internal modelling of self and world, prioritization of needs, 
attention, working memory, global broadcast, higher- order monitoring, con-
ceptual thought, and so on) all of which have a genuine but partial claim to 
the label ‘sentience’, at least when processing valenced contents.
It seems to me that this type of materialist can still agree with the proposed 
meta- consensus as a way forward for the short term, even though they may 
dislike some aspects of how it is worded. Where my proposal says ‘sentience’, 
they will want it to say ‘the family of cognitive/neurobiological kinds towards 
which the term “sentience” indeterminately gestures’. As noted in Chapter 3, 
they will, at some point, have to confront the vexed question of which of these 
kinds should inherit the ethical role usually aﬀorded to sentience, and the 
practical implications will depend on how they resolve that question. In the 
meantime, we have little choice but to frame these issues in terms of sentience, 
lacking any successor notion that is ready to take on its ethical and practical 
role.
In short, many people may, for various reasons, hope the current meta- 
consensus is something we can move beyond as new evidence comes to light. 
This could take the form of a narrowing of the range of realistic possibilities, a 
widening of that range, or a restructuring of the way we think about the range. 
But holding such a hope is compatible with accepting that the meta- consensus 
succeeds in capturing the positions we need to take seriously now, given the 
evidence we have.
6.3 Two Bridging Concepts: Sentience Candidates  
and Investigation Priorities
With this idea of a scientiﬁc meta- consensus in the background, we can con-
struct two bridging concepts that can help us move from disagreement in the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
