TAO,.G A 5/()AUT,-.A/0 BTA.)( T-3A/CB 2(TUB(B 
MNH
development of sentience. Fetal stress responses in response to surgery 
(which are clearly observed from around 18 weeks’ gestation) need to be 
managed regardless of whether they are accompanied by any subjective 
ex peri ence of pain, since they create a risk of triggering premature labour, as 
well as a risk of sudden movement that obstructs incredibly delicate surgery.46 
This echoes the point made in §10.1 regarding pain in neonates. People will 
always disagree about the onset of sentience, but there can be overlapping 
consensus around the need to manage physiological stress responses, given 
their known downstream risks.
Despite this, it is not clear how widely fetal anaesthesia and pain relief is 
actually used when fetal surgery is performed. A literature review of published 
reports of fetal surgery by a team of paediatricians led by Carlo Bellieni found 
that less than half of the reported procedures attempted direct fetal analgesia.4? 
In some cases, anaesthesiologists seemed to be relying on the idea that maternal 
anaesthetics would cross the placenta in suJcient doses, an assumption Bellieni 
and colleagues considered dubious (note, for example, that administering a 
general anaesthetic to the mother does not anaesthetize the fetus during a 
caesarean section). In a more recent piece, Bellieni expressed optimism that 
‘anesthesia to the fetus is now a widespread and accepted practice’.48 But 
without more data on its use, the picture remains murky.
One obvious (and, I hope, uncontroversial) proposal is that data should be 
collected and published on this issue, to facilitate informed public debate and 
to cultivate trust. This is in the interests of the medical profession itself. Recall 
the outcry in the 1980s, when it came to light that medical norms regarding 
neonates were severely out of line with societal expectations. By facilitating 
and encouraging ongoing discussion, and involving the public in that discus-
sion, the medical profession can prevent the same level of mismatch from 
arising again.
Proposal 9. Fetal pain relief (in therapeutic contexts). Direct fetal 
anaesthesia and pain relief should be considered whenever therapeutic 
fetal surgery is performed. The public should be involved in discussions 
about general norms of medical practice (not speciﬁc decisions), and data 
regarding current practices should be collected and published to allow 
such discussions.
46 Hoagland and Chatterjee (2017).
4? Bellieni et al. (2013).
48 Bellieni (2021, p. 1615).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
