.61/.-6:/1E// ;-T,6:T V04E1.E 
)E
interests, whether or not it has experiences of joy or frustration associated 
with the success or failure of those projects. In other words, the cases show us 
that there is a second path to morally signiﬁcant interests, one that does not 
run via valence. A being with only experiences of white noise, or slight bright-
ness, has neither of the two paths.
There is an important similarity between the two paths. For the Vulcan is 
still registering the promotion or thwarting of its interests in conscious 
ex peri ence. This is not true of the nerve net crackling with contentless white 
noise. So, I propose that the step up in moral standing associated with sen-
tience is the change that comes when events that promote or thwart a being’s 
interests are registered in experience. Valenced experience has a special 
importance because it is the most common way of registering interests in the 
animal kingdom. It enables the conscious registration of one’s interests being 
promoted or thwarted in beings who lack sophisticated forms of rational agency. 
The philosophical Vulcan has found a diﬀerent route to the same outcome.11
Rational beings who can re9ect on their experiences, as we can, may 
endorse the pursuit of pleasure and other positive experiences (such as aes-
thetic experiences) for their own sake. For such beings, valenced experience 
acquires a second type of ethical signiﬁcance. It is no longer just a currency in 
which interests register consciously: it is also constitutive of some of those 
interests. Consider, by way of analogy, the diﬀerence between someone who 
uses money as a currency and someone who comes to value money for its 
own sake. But my proposal is that even in beings with no capacity to re9ect 
on their experiences or to value them for their own sake, valenced experience 
matters simply by virtue of registering interests.
To my mind, the most plausible overall picture is one on which a capacity 
for phenomenal consciousness is a necessary but not suﬃcient condition for 
moral standing. In addition, the ability to register the promotion or frustra-
tion of one’s interests in experience, in the form of either valenced experience 
or the explicit rational endorsement of goals, must also be in place. White 
noise is not enough. So, my own view is close to the sentientist view but adds 
a qualiﬁcation. This qualiﬁcation is probably not very important right now, 
but it may become important in the future, if we happen to create AI systems 
that resemble philosophical Vulcans.
11 Luke Roelofs (2023) has arrived at a similar solution, though emphasizing the kinds of ex peri-
ence that provide motivating reasons rather than those which register interests. These classes will 
overlap, but perhaps not perfectly.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
