B? 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
determinately non- conscious. That is an unpalatable implication (see Chapter 
4 for further discussion of ‘non- sentientist’ ethical options and their 
problems).
3.4 Radical Alternatives
At the start of §3.3 we noted four radical alternatives to materialist orthodoxy: 
inter action ist dualism, pan(proto)psychism, biopsychism, and the integrated 
information theory.2O The ﬁrst two ﬁnd a place for consciousness in the causal 
order of the universe (and so di!er from epiphenomenalism in this respect) 
but in a way that does not involve taking consciousness to be essentially phys-
ic al. The third and fourth, meanwhile, are hard to place in relation to more 
traditional categories. Let us give these pictures their due. All are sometimes 
dismissed as examples of exactly the sort of unconstrained speculation that 
obstructs reasonable disagreement, but this would, I think, be unfair. 
Cautiously formulated versions of these views can be part of the zone of rea-
son able disagreement.
Interactionist Dualism
An interactionist dualist holds that the ontology of current physics will need 
substantial augmentation to explain consciousness. Some materialists would 
agree. But the interactionist adds that physics will need to be augmented with 
new ontological posits that are distinctive to conscious beings. The idea is 
that there are as- yet- undiscovered fundamental laws, properties, and maybe 
even (on the most radical version of the view) particles that are implicated in 
generating consciousness but absent from ordinary matter.
The need for special ontological posits distinctive to conscious beings is 
common to all versions of dualism, including epiphenomenalism. The big 
disagreement with epiphenomenalism is that, for the interactionist, these 
special properties and/or particles causally interact with the ordinary phys-
ic al properties of our brains, nudging the storm of neural activity one way or 
another. So, some special causal power distinctive to consciousness must be 
added to the list of fundamental forces posited by physics. The standard 
model of contemporary physics says: there is gravity, electromagnetism, the 
2O This section draws on Birch (2020d).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
