8F 
A WA() A(ON, -./ /0,/
tardigrades, microscopic zooplankton? Just mammals? Their ﬁrst draE 
 covered all vertebrates, leading to understandable criticism from animal wel-
fare organizations, who felt at least some invertebrates— and especially octo-
puses, crabs, and lobsters— should also be included.
Defra commissioned a team led by me to review the evidence of sentience 
in two speciﬁc invertebrate taxa: the cephalopod molluscs (including octo-
puses, squid, and cuttleﬁsh) and the decapod crustaceans (including lobsters, 
crayﬁsh, true crabs, and true shrimps;GFig. 1.2). Defra was clear from the out-
set that other invertebrate taxa were not on the table for possible inclusion. 
They wanted an informed opinion about these two. We reviewed over three 
hundred relevant scientiﬁc studies, synthesizing a complicated, gradated, 
messy evidential picture.!H We arrived at a clear recommendation: all ceph-
alo pod molluscs and decapod crustaceans should be included in the scope of 
animal welfare laws. To its credit, the government accepted our recommenda-
tion and amended its bill. The Sentience Act does encompass all cephalopod 
molluscs and all decapod crustaceans. It does not extend to brine shrimps or 
copepods since, like most crustaceans, they are not decapods.
I am pleased we moved past ‘Maybe we’ll never know!’, reviewed all the 
relevant evidence we could ﬁnd, and made a sensible practical recommenda-
tion on the basis of that evidence. We never achieved— or claimed to have 
achieved— certainty. Our approach was based on evaluating the evidence and 
communicating its strength as honestly and transparently as we could. I will 
reﬂect more on what I learned from this experience in Chapter 12.
1.3 When to Stop?
In 2022, the journal Neuron published an article called ‘In vitro neurons learn 
and exhibit sentience when embodied in a simulated game- world’.!! The 
authors used human stem cells and brain tissue from mouse embryos to grow 
networks of around 1 million cortical neurons (i.e. cells of a type normally 
found in the neocortex, the part of the brain traditionally associated with 
higher- cognitive functions) (Fig. 1.3). The number is comparable to the total 
number of neurons in the brain of a bee.
They mounted the network on a computer interface called a high- density 
multi- electrode array, giving it, in e;ect, control over the paddle in a game 
of Pong. Just twenty minutes of ‘gameplay’ was enough to produce a 
!H Birch et al. (2021).
!! Kagan et al. (2022).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
