.) 3E0,CH (F E2H.C05 F,0NEL(,O /,.)C./5E3 
%K?
these? This is a useful shi! from the question: is the system sentient? The ﬁrst 
question, unlike the second, is one we can answer using current evidence, 
and our answers can command widespread support and conﬁdence from 
people with many diﬀerent theoretical sympathies.
6.4 In Search of Ethical Framework Principles
Let us turn to ethical disagreement. Can there be any consensus here? It is 
clear that, given the very large ethical disagreements about the signiﬁcance of 
sentience, any consensus principles will be very thin. This cannot be helped. 
Inevitably, a question will arise about whether these principles are too thin to 
provide meaningful guidance. Can we ﬁnd ‘Goldilocks’ principles that are 
uncontroversial enough to command support right across the zone of reason-
able disagreement, yet contentful enough to guide us towards agreement on 
courses of action?
I want to propose three such principles. The ﬁrst aims to capture a very 
general, high- level duty to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering to sentient 
beings. The second and third concern how that duty applies in cases where 
sentience is actively and reasonably disputed.
We have seen that all major religions and all reasonable secular ethical 
views, even rationality- centric views, contain reasons for limiting what 
humans can do to other sentient beings (Chapter 4). Usually, other animals 
are the sentient beings people have in mind when they discuss these issues, 
but the underlying reasons apply to any sentient being. These limits, at 
minimum, rule out causing gratuitous suﬀering, where ‘gratuitous’ implies 
the absence of a good reason for causing the suﬀering.
Think of the biblical example of a person who refuses to help unload an ox 
suﬀering under the weight of their burden, or that of a person who slaughters 
an animal by tearing it limb from limb. People who perpetrate such acts are 
behaving unconscionably: they have either not thought about the conse-
quences of their actions for the animal at all, have embraced an unreasonable 
position such as sadism, or are betraying their own values. A liberal, pluralis-
tic society does not need to make room for this kind of behaviour and can 
legitimately ban it.
This point of agreement exists despite a sea of underlying disagreement. 
First, there is disagreement on the question of to whom the duty is owed. 
Perhaps it is owed to the animal (as on animal rights views) or to oneself (on 
the Aquinas/Kant indirect duty view), or perhaps talk of ‘duties’ is just a 
shorthand for the results of a utility calculation (as on utilitarian views) or the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
