2E2 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
My emphasis on consistency— a recurring theme throughout the book— leads 
me here to a surprising proposal. If we are prepared to extend sentience can-
didature across the :shes, including elasmobranchs and cyclostomes, based 
on evidence of conserved midbrain mechanisms, plus evidence linking those 
mechanisms to sentience in a small subset of species, then we must take the 
same approach to the insects. I propose that all adult insects are sentience 
candidates, since all possess a central complex. It would be a double standard 
to restrict our precautionary thinking to just some insects, while extending it 
to all :shes.
Why ‘adult’ insects? The central complex is not fully developed in larvae,2C 
so Barron and Klein’s argument only extends as far as adult insects. This is 
practically signi:cant, since a great deal of contemporary insect farming 
involves farming larvae, killing them before they reach adulthood. More evi-
dence on the capacities of the larvae of commercially important species, such 
as black soldier ﬂy larvae, is urgently needed. Farmed larvae are investigation 
priorities, and we will give them their due in the next section.
The extension of sentience candidature even to adult insects is not a step to 
be taken lightly. Since there are only around 45,000 vertebrate species, the 
expansion involves expanding the number of species regarded as sentience 
candidates by a factor of at least twenty and potentially over one hundred. We 
go from regarding a small minority of animal species as sentience candidates 
to regarding a large majority as such.8D Arguments about consistency can cut 
both ways: some may see this as a reason to withhold sentience candidature 
from the elasmobranchs and cyclostomes. Perhaps we should sort elasmo-
branchs, cyclostomes, and all adult insects other than bees and fruit ﬂies into 
the category of ‘investigation priority’, at least in those cases where human 
activities create welfare risks for these animals.
This is a judgement call: it is not arbitrary, but the balance of reasons on 
both sides is delicate, and diﬀerent expert panels could easily come to diﬀer-
ent views. It would be problematic if questions of huge practical signi:cance 
rested on such judgement calls; that is something we should try to avoid. We 
can avoid it, provided we are willing to take some provisional steps to protect 
investigation priorities as well as sentience candidates— something I will 
advocate in the next chapter, when considering insect farming.
2C Gowda et al. (2021).
8D How many individual animals? The :gure of 10 quintillion (10 billion billion, or 1018) is ofen 
given, although I am unsure where this comes from. The earliest reference I could :nd is Berenbaum 
(1995), who described 10 quintillion as an earlier estimate, but without giving a source for it.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
