7
Involving the Public
The last chapter was a search for consensus. I proposed that all reasonable 
positions regarding the nature and ethical signiﬁcance of sentience can con-
verge on the idea that precautions may be warranted when a being is a sen-
tience candidate. While the assessment of sentience candidature calls for 
expert judgement based on the scientiﬁc evidence, we need informed and 
inclusive democratic processes to address questions of proportionality. 
Moreover, given the potential for the evidential picture to change quickly, we 
need processes that revisit the issues periodically and whenever signiﬁcant 
new evidence emerges.
This transforms a question about what to do into a question about institu-
tional design. This chapter picks up that question. What sort of processes can 
deliver eﬀectively on the promise of being appropriately informed, inclusive, 
and democratic?
7.1 Citizens’ Assemblies and Panels: The Basic Idea
In 2021 and 2022, I participated in public dialogues on genome editing for 
the Nuﬃeld Council on Bioethics. My role in these dialogues was to answer 
questions from panels of members of the public selected by a polling com-
pany to be representative of the wider population. I had some initial concerns 
about the idea. Would members of the public, most without any scientiﬁc 
training, be able to grasp the fundamental issues? Would they end up being 
asked to adjudicate scientiﬁc disputes miles away from their own expertise? 
Would the process degenerate into a kind of ‘expertise laundering’, in which a 
group of experts would present their own opinions and get them back again 
at the end, freshly washed, as the ‘will of the people’?
There are many ways for a process like this to fail, but I had a strong sense 
that the dialogues in which I participated succeeded. I started to see how the 
answers to the above questions could be ‘no’. The public panel seemed to have 
a strong grasp of the ethical issues at the heart of the matter and an eye for the 
big picture. They were not pushed around by the experts and disagreed with 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
