MNM 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
would be justiﬁable. But it is a fallacy to infer that, because one view is the 
majority view, alternative views are ‘not possible’. This is a way of shutting 
down the diJcult conversation about risk and precaution that should prop-
erly ensue, given that there are (and were in 2010) credible minority views on 
which pain in the second trimester is possible.;;
In a 2020 article with John Bockmann, Derbyshire announced a volte- face.;4 
Derbyshire and Bockmann cite Merker as having provided (thirteen years 
earlier) a credible alternative to a cortex- centric view of pain and cite studies 
suggesting that the ‘pain matrix’, a set of cortical areas ofen linked to pain in 
adults, is neither necessary nor suJcient for pain experience.;5 They also cite 
a study that found organizational similarities (though in a study of audition 
rather than pain, and in ferrets rather than humans) between mature 
 cortical tissue and the subplate, an important developmental precursor to the 
cortex.;6 This study provided some evidence, in the case of hearing, that the 
subplate does support early precursors of cortical functions and does not 
solely exist to scaﬀold the development of the cortex. These new develop-
ments led Derbyshire and Bockmann to argue that:
Current neuroscientiﬁc evidence undermines the necessity of the cortex for 
pain experience. Even if the cortex is deemed necessary for pain experience, 
there is now good evidence that thalamic projections into the subplate, 
which emerge around 12 weeks’ gestation, are functional and equivalent to 
thalamocortical projections that emerge around 24 weeks’ gestation. Thus, 
current neuroscientiﬁc evidence supports the possibility of fetal pain before 
the ‘consensus’ cut- oﬀ of 24 weeks.;?
They concluded that ‘the evidence, and a balanced reading of that evidence, 
points towards an immediate and unreﬂective pain experience mediated by 
the developing function of the nervous system from as early as 12 weeks’, that 
is, around the end of the ﬁrst trimester and the beginning of the second.;8
In my view, the evidence available in 2010 was already enough to support 
the more precautionary stance supported by Derbyshire and Bockmann in 
2020. It is true that the declining fortunes of the ‘pain matrix’ hypothesis and 
;; The report was criticized at the time. See Platt (2011).
;4 Derbyshire and Bockmann (2020).
;5 Feinstein et al. (2016); Salomons et al. (2016).
;6 Wess et al. (2017).
;? Derbyshire and Bockmann (2020, p. 4).
;8 Derbyshire and Bockmann (2020, p. 6). The same ﬁgure of 12 weeks— the start of the second 
trimester— is reached by Ciaunica et al. (2021) by a quite diﬀerent line of reasoning, based on ‘the 
development of prospective, anticipatory awareness in motor control’, i.e. evidence that the midbrain 
is operational and performing the modelling functions taken to be important by Merker’s theory.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
