AAAB0/N-A( ,O(/3C 
8L
stem cells. This area has tremendous promise, and, in principle at least, 
itGgives scientists ways to model the human brain without experimenting 
on other animals. Organoid research is steaming ahead with great self- 
conﬁdence, and even with a sense of humour, as shown by terms such as 
‘DishBrain’.
I suspect the humour will start to drain away as researchers face up to the 
gravity of what they are doing. As ethical concerns grow, labels that playfully 
exaggerate the similarity with human brains will give way to cautious ter min-
ology that emphasizes di;erence. We need to be careful on both sides. We 
must not overestimate the similarities. But at the same time, we must not rule 
out the possibility of genuine sentience— ethically signiﬁcant experience— in 
constructions made from living human brain tissue.
I have spoken to regulators in this area and found a great deal of worry and 
perplexity about how to regulate this emerging area of research. The potential 
scientiﬁc and medical beneﬁts are very large. We should not crack down on it 
heavy- handedly. Yet, intuitively, there is a point at which we should stop doing 
this kind of research, no matter what the beneﬁts. If we construct sentient 
beings and force them to live as disembodied brains on which we can experi-
ment freely, we will have crossed an ethical line. The problem is what to do 
now, when we have not crossed that line but ﬁnd it hard to see where the line 
is through the fog of uncertainty.
These questions cannot be fully separated from broader questions about 
the relation between sentience and human brain development. When a 
human fetus develops normally, the onset of sentience is no more clearly 
marked, and no less mysterious, than it is in an organoid. The uncertainty is 
agonizing, because important clinical decisions hinge on when exactly we 
start regarding the fetus as a potentially sentient being. As I’ll explain in 
Chapter 10, I do not think questions about the permissibility of abortion turn 
on the issue of sentience, even though they may initially seem to do so. But 
other very important decisions, such as whether to use anaesthetics during 
medical procedures on the fetus, do turn on this issue.
1.4 Accidental Golems
Some years ago, my eye was caught by the headline, ‘We’ve put a worm’s mind 
in a Lego robot’s body’.!2 The article was about the OpenWorm project, a 
!2 Fessenden (2014).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
