K4U7 ./L2,1.061.4/ P7.47.1.2, 
2EE
immediately sensed. The crab is representing the value of what it has to lose, 
and weighing this against the disvalue of staying. In bees, the trade- oﬀs are 
made in prospect, when choosing which heat pad to approach.
A huge amount of uncertainty remains about how crabs and bees make 
these decisions, but the behaviour makes a role for evaluative representation 
very plausible. In C. elegans, by contrast, the behaviour is most likely due to 
hunger inhibiting threat detection via a single inhibitory synaptic connection 
between a threat detection neuron and a neuron registering an internal 
state.;D The mechanism is so direct that it undermines the relevance of the 
behaviour to questions of sentience. We were looking for evidence of repre-
sentational systems more complex than our own unconscious reﬂex 
responses, and we have not found that.
So, there is no theoretical rationale for interpreting lists of pain criteria as 
generously as they need to be interpreted to allow C. elegans to satisfy them. 
Even the most inclusive theoretical views of sentience that motivate the cri-
teria (the midbrain- centred theories) support interpreting those criteria more 
narrowly. We should seek evidence of the evaluative modelling of behavioural 
options in the brain, and trade- oﬀ behaviour can be evidence of this kind of 
modelling, but only when it goes beyond the direct modulation of behaviour 
by some immediate stimulus (such as desiccation, odour, starvation) and 
involves an internal representation of an opportunity for reward or a poten-
tial threat. In C. elegans, behaviour seems to be driven by immediate stimuli, 
with no reason to posit internal representations. That said, further investiga-
tion is clearly warranted, and we have to be open to all possible outcomes of 
this investigation, including an outcome in which we end up reclassifying 
nematodes as sentience candidates.
Spiders
Spiders have an integrative brain centre, the arcuate body, that shows various 
similarities and diﬀerences to the insect central complex.;1 What is it capable 
of? The behaviour of some spiders is enough to shake any con:dence we 
might have had that they are not sentient. Indeed, some evidence points 
towards the prospective evaluative modelling of options. I am thinking here 
of the salticid spiders, such as those of the Portia genus, which are famed for 
;D Ghosh et al. (2016).
;1 Loesel et al. (2011).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
