B/,BGH3.3 13 ‘-B4B212I ?.2,.B21,.3’ 
)3J
(those in the R1–R2 range of Chapter 6) regard as indispensable for sentience. 
On the other side, we see straight- out assertions that, because they lack a 
neocortex, ‘ﬁsh do not feel pain’.2D These assertions rest on overconﬁdence in 
a cortex- centric theory of consciousness, plus undue neglect of midbrain- centric 
theories and of the possibility that cortical functions in mammals may be 
supported by other brain regions in ﬁshes. The parallels with similarly 
overconﬁdent statements about brain injury patients and about fetuses 
should now be clear, in light of Part III. Yet the serious :aws in these 
 sceptical arguments have sometimes led to accusations of ‘sentience denial’,21 
suggesting bad faith. This has provoked further reactions, leading to a 
needlessly polarized debate.
We need to move beyond this, and the concept of a sentience candidate 
allows us to do so. Midbrain- centric theories, together with the behavioural 
evidence, imply a realistic possibility of sentience in ﬁshes that it would be 
irresponsible to ignore when designing policy. Talk of certainty or proof 
‘beyond reasonable doubt’ is not appropriate, but nor is it appropriate to treat 
ﬁshes as if they felt nothing, taking no precautions at all and paying no regard 
to the possibility of suﬀering.
In recent decades, the debate has started to shif towards invertebrates, 
which tend to receive even fewer welfare protections than ﬁshes. That has 
also been the main focus of my ‘Foundations of Animal Sentience’ project at 
the LSE. For me, as for many others, it was octopuses that ﬁrst convinced me 
of the idea that some invertebrates are sentience candidates. This woke me up 
to the possibility many other invertebrates could be sentience candidates 
too— something I now believe to be the case.
12.2 Octopuses as ‘Honorary Vertebrates’
In UK science, octopuses have, in eﬀect, been regarded as sentience candi-
dates for a long time. In 1992, the UK government asked an advisory body 
called the Animal Procedures Committee to consider whether the UK’s main 
piece of legislation concerning animals in science— the Animals (Scientiﬁc 
Procedures) Act 1986, ASPA— should be amended to regulate research on 
cephalopod molluscs. The cephalopod molluscs include octopuses, along 
with all species of squid, cuttleﬁsh, and nautilus.
2D Key (2015, 2016).
21 Sneddon et al. (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
