76O 
D04A()NG -R,-,R(),NA/)(5
about proportionality, which the public will then simply rubber- stamp, 
reducing the process to a form of expertise laundering.
The foregoing pragmatic analysis is intended to help defuse this concern. 
For each test, there are factual sub- questions that call for expert input. 
Suppose we dedicate one day’s deliberation to each test. It would make sense 
for the day to start with presentations by experts that address those sub- 
questions, and for the experts to remain available throughout the day to 
answer follow- up questions from deliberative subgroups. However, there are 
also clearly evaluative sub- questions that call for public input. Those would 
be the main focus of deliberation. Panel members would be encouraged not 
to defer to the experts on those sub- questions, and experts would be encour-
aged not to reveal their private views on them.DTable 8.1 summarizes the div-
ision of labour, andDFigure 8.2 summarizes the overall procedure.
On those factual sub- questions where expert input is needed, it is rea son-
able to expect experts to put their answers in plain language that ordinary 
citizens can understand (e.g. by using probability yardsticks and conﬁdence 
levels). None of the questions demand inaccessible, technical answers. In 
answering these questions, some value- judgements will be made, un avoid-
ably. For example, experts will have to make judgements about how to apply 
coarse- grained probabilistic language (such as ‘highly likely’) to borderline 
cases where the yardstick does not determine what to say.94 But those value- 
judgements will not dictate the policy response and will not be beyond scru-
tiny. If a member of the public wants to ask ‘Wait, why did you describe that 
as highly likely?’ they will have the opportunity to do so.
Meanwhile, on all of those evaluative sub- questions where public input is 
needed, ordinary members of the public are competent to answer the ques-
tions being posed. The key questions are:
• Does this option depart too far from our shared moral values to deserve 
further consideration?
• What level of risk reduction is acceptable, given our shared values and 
attitudes towards risk, and bearing in mind that our shared way of life 
requires us to tolerate some risks?
• Where harms and costs are imposed, can they be justiﬁed to those 
aﬀected as reasonably necessary to achieve adequate risk reduction?
• Where inconsistencies arise (e.g. with other risks or with past prece-
dent), should they be resolved by breaking with past practice, or by 
reconsidering our response to the current risk?
94 Steele (2012).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
