%KK 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
needed to have conscious experiences. Brain injuries to regions associated 
with language can lead to temporary aphasia (loss of linguistic ability) of vari-
ous kinds, but subjects, when they recover, can o!en vividly recount their 
conscious experiences during the time they were aﬀected.:H
I need to emphasize the key point about the diﬀerence between absolute 
certainty and a reasonable basis for action. I am not suggesting that views 
outside the range R1–R5 can be decisively ruled out with absolute, 100% cer-
tainty. What I have in mind is closer to the old idea of ‘moral certainty’: 
enough conﬁdence to justify setting aside these views when grave practical 
questions are at stake.
Think back to when I introduced the idea of a zone of reasonable dis agree-
ment in Chapter 3. I said that we should imagine a grave, serious space in 
which people are debating potential grounds for taking actions that will 
change lives. In other spaces, there should be room for free speculation. But 
to base policy on free speculation would be a serious mistake. That is the 
boundary I am trying to draw. Possibilities in the range R1–R5 have amassed 
enough evidence to deserve serious consideration when important practical 
questions are at stake, whereas views outside this range have not.
R1–R5 are not comprehensive theories of sentience: they can be mixed and 
matched with compatible ideas in the literature (e.g. those in Fig. 6.1) to gen-
erate coherent packages of views. The full option space is very large and 
always changing. As the fortunes of particular theories wax and wane, diﬀer-
ent packages of views will become more or less popular. But I expect that the 
basic disagreement about the relative importance of the prefrontal cortex, 
other cortical regions, and the midbrain, and about whether sentience can be 
achieved by functional analogues of these structures, as mapped out by R1–
R5, will outlive our current theories.
Who might object to the proposed meta- consensus? Those sympathetic to 
biopsychism and/or full IIT may believe that any living tissue can, under the 
right conditions, realize sentience (alternatively, they may take this to be true 
of conscious experience but not valence). This may seem at odds with the pro-
posed meta- consensus, but it is not. The meta- consensus aims to capture the 
range of views it is appropriate to take into account now in decision- making 
contexts, given the current evidence. It aims to capture those views that have 
been established as realistic possibilities. A person can acknowledge that only 
R1–R5 have su8cient evidence now to deserve serious con sid er ation in 
practical contexts while at the same time holding out hope that new evidence 
:H Koch (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
