54P 
I(VO2VI() TH, 13B2I?
sure there are such representatives in every deliberative group. I imagine a 
citizens’ panel would be very likely to grant such a request.
These are reﬂections on how to design a process that properly represents 
human interests, but in fact I think that these ideas can also help with the 
problem of representing non- human interests. The general idea of a panel co- 
opting new members to speak for those who cannot speak for themselves has 
applicability beyond the case of disorders of consciousness. Citizens’ panels 
should be allowed to co- opt representatives of animal interests, or (in the 
future) AI interests, if they think it appropriate to do so.
Some may object that there is still an element of anthropocentrism in this 
process, because the initial panel only represents human interests and is not 
compelled to expand. Conceivably, it may decline to co- opt any new mem-
bers. But expansion through choice is better than forced expansion, given 
that the aim is for the wider public to have conﬁdence in the results. We start 
from where we are: a pluralistic society composed of humans, trying to 
decide how to live. We need processes that give us room to expand our moral 
circle and represent a wider range of interests. But that choice to expand 
must, realistically, come from us.
In sum, to address concerns about representativeness, citizens’ panels 
should be substantial (at least 150 citizens) but should be split into much 
smaller groups of 10–25 for deliberation. They should be well- informed not 
just about the options and the issues, but also about how the options might 
disproportionately a;ect speciﬁc minority groups. They should have the 
power to co- opt new members to ensure that marginalized perspectives are 
represented in every deliberative group.
Deference
A common source of unease about citizens’ panels is a suspicion that citizens 
will simply defer to experts— this is the ‘expertise laundering’ worry I myself 
had before participating in such a panel. I think the trials of citizens panels that 
have occurred so far have tended to suggest that this concern is misplaced.:A 
Citizens think for themselves. They do not simply latch on to particularly 
charismatic experts and defer to them. We experts are not the irresistible 
authorities we sometimes take ourselves to be.
:A Fishkin (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
