4L 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
of any kind at all, since non- valenced experiences do not generate the right 
sort of ethical claims. And not ‘aﬀective’ experience either, since, strictly 
speaking, this term also encompasses states that have neutral valence but 
positive or negative arousal, which would not be enough.
This still leaves plenty of room for dissent from those who reject all three of 
the pictures just mentioned (for example, it is clear enough that Kant would 
have rejected all three pictures). We will turn to the issue of reasonable ethical 
disagreement later (in Chapter 4), because it implies limits on what can be a 
matter of robust, society- wide consensus in this area. But for now, my aim is 
simply to motivate the special focus on valenced experience in our working 
de!nition of sentience. The fact that three major ethical theories agree on the 
special importance of valence is enough to achieve that aim.
In the previous section, I outlined three ways of thinking about the nature 
of valence; this section has now set out three ways of thinking about why it 
matters ethically. How do the two trios relate to each other? As far as logical 
compatibility is concerned, I think we can mix and match: any theory of 
valence can be combined with any theory of why valence matters without 
generating an obvious contradiction. However, there are ways in which cer-
tain theories of valence’s nature may complement (in a way that falls short of 
logical implication) certain theories of its ethical signi!cance. Classical utili-
tarianism !ts very neatly with a picture of valence as hedonic quality. By con-
trast, the Korsgaard and Nussbaum pictures !t best with a picture of valence 
that ties it closely to the representation of value. What is special about valence, 
for both Korsgaard and Nussbaum, is that it involves an animal implicitly 
valuing some situations and disvaluing others. As Nussbaum puts it, some 
situations are ‘seen as good’, while others are ‘seen as bad’. An account of 
valence as the non- conceptual representation of value secures this link very 
directly, though it could probably be secured less directly by the other 
accounts.
To sum up the message of the chapter: when we ask (for instance) ‘Do 
octopuses have feelings?’ the question is not (or at least should not be) 
whether they have feelings for which we already have words in English. The 
question should be whether they have conscious experiences and whether 
those experiences are at least sometimes valenced. De!ning sentience as the 
capacity for valenced experience sets us on the right track, asking the right 
questions.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
