2(TUB(B AB B(.T,(.)( )A.C,CAT(B 
677
‘as far as possible’ because there are inevitably some connections, to which we 
will return later.
Proposal 7. Sentience and abortion. The point at which a human fetus 
becomes sentient is not the point at which abortion becomes morally 
impermissible. We should separate these issues. The ethics of abortion 
depends primarily on questions of personhood and bodily autonomy, not 
on questions of sentience.
10.3 Fetuses as Sentience Candidates
We need to take seriously the possibility that human fetuses have a minimal 
form of sentience from an early stage in development. The earliest credible 
time point for when a fetus becomes a sentience candidate, given current evi-
dence and the deﬁnition of a sentience candidate, is approximately at the start 
of the second trimester. The consequences of this may be challenging to man-
age, but we have to face up to them.
One way to introduce this idea is through the changing views of one inﬂu-
ential fetal pain expert, Stuart Derbyshire. In the 1990s, Derbyshire was a 
powerful critic of the idea of fetal pain at any point in gestation, writing in the 
British Medical Journal that ‘ “fetal pain” is a misnomer’.:; Elsewhere, Derbyshire 
made a detailed case for this claim, concluding that:
Given what pain is understood to be . . . , the complex neurology that pain 
processing requires . . . and the limited neurological and cognitive develop-
ment of the fetus . . . , I would reject the characterisation of any such ex peri-
ence [in the fetus] as ‘pain’.:4
What was the argument? Derbyshire noted that evidence sometimes taken to 
indicate pain in both fetuses and neonates— primarily, nociceptive responses 
and stress responses to stimuli— occur without any involvement of the mature 
cortical circuits linked to pain experiences in adults, and thus ‘may exist inde-
pendently of conscious experience’.:5 He then outlined a theory on which 
conscious experience does not begin until around four months afer birth 
:; Derbyshire and Furedi (1996).
:4 Derbyshire (1999, p. 27). See also Derbyshire (2006).
:5 Derbyshire (1999, p. 22).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
