./,2C1, 6, ,2/1.2/C2 C6/5.5612, 
2EJ
a package. None conclusively shows that insects are sentient, but of all them 
make it more likely than we might have initially thought.
We then come to a delicate judgement call: when have we accumulated 
enough probability- raising markers to establish a realistic possibility of sen-
tience that it would be irresponsible to ignore when making practical deci-
sions, and an evidence base rich enough to allow the design and assessment 
of precautions? My own assessment is that we have already crossed that line 
for bees and for Drosophila, and should be thinking now about what precau-
tions we might be able to take to reduce risks of suﬀering in these animals.
What of the other insects? I have been talking here of ‘insect sentience’, but 
should we really assess the insects as a single group? There are vastly more 
species of insect than of decapod crustacean. Around 1 million species are 
known, with the total number likely to be at least double this, and probably 
over 5 million.26 In the last chapter, we considered some of the complexities 
involved in generalizing across the decapods, given the striking diversity of 
brain organization and the miniaturization of the hemiellipsoid bodies in 
penaeid shrimps. Can it really be reasonable to generalize across the insects?
We should be wary of generalizing when the topic is the advanced working 
memory and associative learning abilities of bees. The vast majority of insects 
have never been tested for these abilities. So, we cannot be sure they are 
absent, but there is no positive evidence that they are present. However, the 
situation is diﬀerent for Barron and Klein’s neurological arguments based on 
the integrative functions of the central complex. A vast number of species 
does not translate into substantial diversity of brain organization. Nicholas 
Strausfeld and collaborators, having painstakingly examined both insect 
mushroom bodies and decapod hemiellipsoid bodies across many diﬀerent 
taxa, remark on the strikingly consistent morphology of mushroom bodies 
among insects, in comparison with the divergence in morphology of the 
hemiellipsoid bodies among decapods.27 Meanwhile, Daniel B. Turner- Evans 
and Vivek Jayaraman have written, of the central complex, that:
the conservation of these structures across 500 million years of arthropod 
evolution speaks to their importance. Though their form varies from spe-
cies to species, individual neurons that innervate the structures are con-
served to a remarkable degree.2B
26 Stork (2018).
27 Strausfeld et al. (2020).
2B Turner- Evans and Jayaraman (2016, p. 453).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
