AVOIDI() TH, T­.A((­ O/ ,01,.T VA23,4 
545
advice to close schools was an implicit value weighting. Advisers implicitly 
judged that the expected harms to children caused by school closures were 
outweighed by the expected harms, especially to clinically vulnerable groups, 
of high infection rates leading to a shortage of intensive care beds.
No one should envy the diﬃcult situation the advisers faced. Moreover, my 
point is not that the advisers’ weighting was incorrect. The point is that the 
case illustrates a procedural pitfall democratic governments should try to 
avoid. Instead of an inclusive, democratic process for making a diﬃcult trade- 
o; that would a;ect the whole of society, a small group of scientiﬁc advisers 
were put in a position where they had to make the relevant trade- o;s using 
their own values.
Some may feel that the only problem in such cases is that scientiﬁc advisers 
are making the trade- o;s, and that incorporating ethical as well as scientiﬁc 
expertise in the pool of advisers would solve the problem. If the trade- o;s are 
made by ethics experts, is this still a tyranny of expert values? I’m afraid it is. 
To be clear, I do favour involving ethicists in the policy- making process, as 
one source of input to citizens’ panels. But I do not think it is acceptable to 
assign to ethicists the role of resolving trade- o;s between conﬂicting values. 
Ethicists have distinctively valuable expertise, because they have knowledge 
of the major traditions in human ethical thought and of how di;erent ethical 
positions relate to each other. This gives them the expertise required to 
explain and articulate the value conﬂicts that lie at the heart of our decision- 
making and to propose possible consistent resolutions. That is the role I am 
trying to play throughout this book. But that does not mean that ethicists 
have any special insight into a mysterious realm of ethical facts, including 
facts about the correct weightings to give to di;erent values. Nor does it mean 
they have the ability to confer democratic legitimacy on their preferred 
resolutions.8H
Citizens’ panels, in contrast to panels of professional ethicists, are an 
appropriate mechanism for resolving conﬂicts about values in a democratic 
society. They avoid accepting any contentious claims to expertise and avoid 
giving any elite group a privileged role in weighing values. When we ask a 
8H Many di;erent meta- ethical positions (both realist and anti- realist) emphasize the value of 
inclusive ethical discussion and so are compatible with my project in this book. I am myself more 
inclined towards anti- realist positions such as norm- expressivism (Gibbard 1992); quasi- realism 
(Blackburn 1993, 1998), pragmatic naturalism (Kitcher 2011a, 2011b; Sager 2014) and moral ﬁction-
alism (Joyce 2006). I am particularly drawn towards the view sketched by Bernard Williams towards 
the end of Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy (1985). Williams suggests that ethical discussion aims 
neither at knowledge nor at simply deciding which values to accept. Rather, the aim is to arrive at a 
state of conﬁdence in our shared values, concepts, and way of life.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
