54L 
I(VO2VI() TH, 13B2I?
7.4 Objections to Citizens’ Panels: Representativeness, 
Deference, Competence
Representativeness
Worries about the representativeness of citizens’ panels arise even if we 
assume they should only represent human interests. These concerns only 
deepen when we want the panels to consider non- human interests too. Let us 
start with the ﬁrst type of concern, and see whether the solutions we arrive at 
can help us with the second type of concern.
If citizens’ panels are to represent the values and interests of the wider 
population, they must resemble that population. They therefore need to be 
large enough to make their statistical representativeness very likely given the 
law of large numbers. Hélène Landemore has proposed a minimum size of 
150. Alexander Guerrero has suggested an ideal size of 300, but in more 
recent work revises this upwards to 450.:H
Although both Guerrero and Landemore downplay it, the need for repre-
sentativeness highlights a diﬃcult challenge of institutional design. Polling 
companies usually work with samples of at least 1,000 in order to be conﬁ-
dent of their representativeness. These samples, since they rely on voluntary 
participation, still tend to depart from the wider population regarding some 
demographic variables, such as the relative frequencies of di;erent socioeco-
nomic groups. To correct for this, polling companies will re- weight their data 
using elaborate formulas. This re- weighting involves value judgements, and 
sometimes leads to controversy even when the poll is simply an opinion poll, 
with no role in decision- making at all. I once generated some controversy on 
this issue myself when I highlighted that voting intention polls tend to give less 
weight to the opinions of younger and working- class voters, since they are 
considered less likely to vote by the polling companies’ weighting models.:8
Yet for a citizens’ panel or assembly, even 1,000 is already very large indeed. 
A panel of 1,000 cannot engage in deliberation as a single panel. The opti-
mum panel size for the purposes of deliberation is closer to the size of a jury 
or a typical committee: 10–25 people. The proposed ﬁgures of at least 150, 
300, and 450 are compromises between two very di;erent optima.
One option is to adopt a ﬁssion- fusion design, whereby a panel hears evi-
dence together, then breaks into smaller, equally sized discussion groups for 
:H Landemore (2020); Guerrero (2014, 2021).
:8 Birch (2017e).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
