92X7/- 56. A7 
3(A
does not arise at all, it seems to me, for neuron- by- neuron emulations of 
animal brains. In these cases, the evidence we !nd compelling in the original 
animals should be taken at face value when found in the emulation. Other 
types of system may be subject to the problem to intermediate degrees. 
Unfortunately, the !rst type of system seems to be exactly the type on which 
current research and innovation eﬀorts are intensely concentrated.
Proposal 23. The gaming problem. For any set of criteria for sentience 
candidature, we need to be aware of the risk of the AI system or its 
designer learning (implicitly or explicitly) that they are regarded as 
criteria, leading to gaming of the criteria. We need to discount markers we 
have reason to think may have been gamed.
The problem is a very frustrating one. For, on the face of it, it undermines our 
ability to use linguistic behaviour of any kind to assess the sentience candida-
ture of LLMs. And this is, obviously, the main kind of behaviour they display.B
16.2 Boxing the AI: Schneider and Turner’s  
‘Artiﬁcial Consciousness Test’
To further underline the severity of the challenge, let us turn to a proposal 
from Susan Schneider and Edwin Turner.C Schneider and Turner have pro-
posed an ‘arti!cial consciousness test’ (ACT) broadly inspired by Alan 
Turing’s well- known approach to related questions. This is one of the most 
carefully worked- out proposals for using linguistic behaviour to detect signs 
of sentience in AI, and yet I do not think it successfully avoids the gaming 
problem.
Turing famously proposed a test for thought: the imitation game, in which 
two players must try to convince a human interlocutor (who is free to ask any 
question to either player) that they are the human and the other player is the 
AI. If an AI system could perform as well as a human player in this game, 
Turing suggested, we would accept that it was a thinking, intelligent being. 
B Though see Perez and Long (2023) for an attempt to characterize linguistic behavioural markers 
that survive the gaming problem.
C Schneider and Turner (2017); Schneider (2019, 2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
