%%9 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
on the basis of unsettled science. This is likely to be the right response where 
there are no in- principle obstacles to building consensus and where the policy 
issue does not demand immediate action. To give one example, I think 
healthcare policy- makers would be well advised to take a slow, gradual 
approach to rolling out the medical use of AI for applications such as cancer 
screening, ﬁrst investing in research to build an adequate level of public con-
ﬁdence in its accuracy and trustworthiness.:
The edge of sentience is not like these cases either. Undoubtedly, further 
research into these questions is important and valuable: as we will see in later 
chapters, there are signiﬁcant evidence gaps that hamper our attempts to 
design precautions in many areas. Yet we should not expect further research 
to conclusively settle the questions, in the way it might conclusively settle a 
more mundane question (e.g. concerning the accuracy of a cancer screening 
algorithm). The disagreements at the edge of sentience are too ‘big- picture’, 
and the methodological problems that stop us conclusively settling our dis-
agree ments in this area run too deep.
The upshot is that reasonable disagreement about the edge of sentience 
will always be with us. How, then, do we move from free and open debate to 
policy decisions? How do we prevent dispute and disagreement from paralys-
ing all attempts at decision- making in this area?
6.2 A Scientiﬁc Meta-consensus on the 
Range of Realistic Possibilities
There is no scientiﬁc consensus about cases at the edge of sentience. Let us 
not pretend otherwise. It is equally important, though, to see that an absence 
of consensus on one speciﬁc theory does not lead to a chaotic ‘anything goes’ 
situation in which all speculation provides an equally reasonable basis for 
precautionary action. Evidence still constrains decision- making.
I ﬁnd the concept of ‘meta- consensus’ helpful for thinking about these situ-
ations. The concept is borrowed from political theory.; In that context, it cap-
tures the idea that people may agree about a lot, even when they disagree 
deeply about the best policy. In particular, they may still agree about the range 
: Birch et al. (2022).
; See Dryzek (2010, ch. 5). See also List (2002) on ‘meta- agreement’, and see List and Spiekermann 
(2019) for an illustration of the idea using the parliamentary deadlock in the UK (at that time) con-
cerning leaving the European Union.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
