6J 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
outside world. And this world need not be the world outside one’s mamma-
lian fur. It may also be a world outside one’s cell membrane. Certainly some 
level of awareness, of responsiveness owing to that awareness, is implied in 
all autopoietic systems.3L
As Evan Thompson has stressed, claims such as these o4en blur a distinction 
we need to keep sharp: the distinction between mere responsiveness to 
stimuli, including responsiveness to attractive and aversive stimuli (which I 
have urged we do not call ‘sentience’) and valenced experience.3O Undoubtedly 
all living cells do respond to stimuli, registering some as attractive and others 
as aversive, and a good theory of the nature of life will explain why. However, 
it does not follow that all living cells have valenced experiences. The idea of 
any logical entailment from autopoiesis to valenced experience is incorrect. 
In Thompson’s words, ‘if “consciousness” means feeling or sentience of 
value, then the above passage expresses an intuition or conviction, not an 
argument’.4P
The absence of any logical entailments between theories of the nature of 
life (including the autopoietic theory) and claims about the nature and distri-
bution of sentience does not mean biopsychism is wrong, nor does it render it 
an unreasonable hypothesis. On the contrary, it is a reasonable but highly 
speculative hypothesis. The mistake is to regard it as more than just a specula-
tive hypothesis. When proponents of biopsychism claim it to be on a par evi-
dentially with scientiﬁc theories of consciousness based on large bodies of 
empirical evidence— or even claim it to be a certainty— they are making a 
signiﬁcant error. We will revisit this point in Part IV, when we will encounter 
some overconﬁdent statements of biopsychist positions.
The Integrated Information Theory
The integrated information theory of consciousness (IIT) has become one of 
the most controversial ideas in contemporary consciousness science.41 Some 
critics have even gone so far as to call it ‘pseudoscience’.42 It would be fairer, I 
think, to call it an outlier. Part of what makes it an outlier is that it rests on a 
3L Margulis and Sagan (1995, p. 122).
3O Thompson (2022).
4P Thompson (2022, p. 241).
41 This subsection draws on a series of blog posts I wrote for the Brains Blog in 2023. The series 
also included a reply by Hedda Hassel Mørch (Birch and Mørch 2023).
42 Lenharo (2023b).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
