;J 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
experience at all, and then imagine it producing an egg that generates o!-
spring with crackling white noise— and the explanatory gap hits us in the face 
with unusual force. What plausible small mutation could possibly prod uce 
such an extraordinary change? But this explanatory gap is with us regardless 
of whether we posit borderline cases. If we posit a region of borderline cases, 
we will still be able to compare the start point with the end point, and ask: 
what plausible series of small mutations could possibly produce such an 
extraordinary change? So, the fact that there is a glaring explanatory gap on 
the sharp boundary view is not a reason to think it implies dualism any more 
strongly than the deep gradualist alternative.
That said, the sharp boundary view still faces the question: what sort of 
neurobiological or cognitive property might plausibly have a sharp bound-
ary? Some popular theories of consciousness seem diﬃcult to reconcile with 
the sharp boundary view if accepted as complete theories. The global neur-
on al workspace (or global workspace) theory is a good example (Fig. 3.2). 
Interpreted as a theory of phenomenal consciousness, and not just cognitive 
access, this theory proposes that content becomes phenomenally conscious 
when it enters a global workspace mechanism that receives and integrates 
content from a wide range of sensory, evaluative, and memory processes and 
broadcasts the integrated content back to the input systems and onward to a 
wide variety of consumer systems, including mechanisms of voluntary report, 
planning, reasoning, and decision- making.I3 It is part of the theory that, 
within an individual human, the entry of a particular representation to the 
workspace is normally a sharp matter: a representation must be all in or all 
out, not in to some degree. Yet when we think about other animals, we can 
expect to ﬁnd a variety of global workspace- like architectures, with variation 
on both the input side and the output side. The theory is silent on the ques-
tion of how ‘global’ the broadcast needs to be to qualify as consciousness- 
generating, and it seems as though any sharp boundary between ‘non- global’ 
and ‘global’ broadcast would be arbitrary, a point Carruthers has made 
forcefully.I4
Other theories, though, seem friendlier to a sharp boundary. For example, 
Hakwan Lau’s ‘perceptual reality monitoring’ theory proposes that conscious 
I3 Dehaene and Changeux (2011); Mashour et al. (2020). The basic idea was originally developed 
by Baars (1988).
I4 Carruthers (2019). For Carruthers, who (in recent work) regards the global neuronal workspace 
theory as a true and complete theory of consciousness, the result is massive indeterminacy in the dis-
tribution of phenomenal consciousness in the natural world. I think this indeterminacy explosion can 
be resisted (Birch 2020a), but some level of indeterminacy seems likely if the global neuronal work-
space theory is true.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
