2HE ,0)-E (F ,E05.32.C /(33.B.5.2.E3 
%%?
of reasonable options, and they may agree about how these options relate to 
each other along important dimensions (such as more moderate to more 
radical). In other words, they may agree about the structure of the option 
space, in at least some key respects. Seeing a meta- consensus can be a step 
towards negotiating a way forward.
To my knowledge, the concept has not yet received discussion in relation 
to scientiﬁc disagreement, but it should. Just as ﬁnding a meta- consensus can 
help lawmakers move forward when they disagree, so ﬁnding a scientiﬁc 
meta- consensus can help scientists move forward, as well as helping outside 
audiences to better understand what is going on in the science. It is all too 
easy for a non- expert, looking in, to think ‘since they disagree so much, there 
is no reason for me to listen to them. I’ll just go with my gut feeling.’ That is 
dangerous and fallacious, but it can be tempting when scientists cannot 
ar ticu late what they do agree about.
Does meta- consensus exist in the science of sentience? I think it does. 
I will ﬁrst state where I think the meta- consensus lies, and then explain why 
I think this:
Proposed meta- consensus on the neural system requirements for sentience
Given our current evidence, all of the following theoretical positions about 
the neural system requirements for sentience (deﬁned as the capacity for 
valenced experience) are realistic possibilities. None should be held dogmatically, 
but all should be taken seriously in practical contexts:
 R1. Sentience requires distinctively primate neural mechanisms (e.g. in 
the granular prefrontal cortex) and is absent in non- primates.
R2. Sentience requires mechanisms distinctive to the mammalian neocor-
tex and is absent in non- mammals.
R3. Sentience requires the neocortex in mammals but can also be 
achieved by other brain mechanisms performing relevantly analogous 
functions (such as the avian pallium).
R4. Sentience does not require the neocortex even in mammals and can 
be achieved in at least a minimal form by integrative subcortical 
mechanisms crucially involving the midbrain. However, it is absent in 
non- vertebrates.
R5. Sentience does not require the neocortex even in mammals and can 
be achieved in at least a minimal form by integrative subcortical 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
