/),T0),C) 8,9 CO,/C0O:/,)// 
2;
What are the other puzzling features of the mind- body relationship? Feigl 
used ‘sapience’ as a term for human- level intelligence and reﬂective thought. 
Writing in 1958, he could see very clearly the potential for decouplings of 
sentience and intelligence in future technologies:
The two concepts are not coextensive. The situation has been further 
 complicated in our age by the construction of ‘intelligent’ machines. Logical 
reasoning, mathematical proofs and computations, forecasting, game 
playing, etc. are all being performed by various and usually highly complex 
electronic devices.8
He went on to add that sentience, by contrast, plausibly ‘requires complex 
organic processes’, a view many still hold now,9 but one that I and many 
 others have come to doubt (see Part V). Intelligence too is a source of philo-
sophical problems, but they are diﬀerent from the problem of sentience and 
not our main concern in this book. Later on (in Part IV), I will suggest that 
sentience and intelligence are methodologically linked— because intelligent 
animals have more ways of displaying their sentience to us— but this does not 
mean they are the same thing.
Sel?ood, the third perplexing feature, refers to our possession of a uni!ed 
self that persists over time. I have a continuous stream of conscious ex peri-
ences from when I wake in the morning until I fall asleep at night, and my 
memory connects these daily streams with each other, and with my dreams10, 
to form the experiences of a single self. Moreover, I am aware of all this: I am 
self- conscious. Here, too, there are associated philosophical puzzles, in this 
case concerning personal identity and the unity of consciousness at a time and 
across time, but they too can be distinguished from the puzzle of sentience.11
Sentience does not conceptually imply sapience or sel?ood; it is a distinct 
concept. Sometimes we end up with distinct concepts for properties that are 
not, in reality, fully distinct. For various reasons, it could turn out that, in 
reality, there can be no sentience— no ‘raw feels’, no qualities— without at least 
some level of sapience and/or sel?ood. But that is not something we can 
safely assume. It is conceivable that there could be something it’s like to be a 
system that wholly lacks thoughts and a uni!ed, persisting self. Experiences 
could conceivably occur wholly in the moment, with no associated memory 
8 Feigl (1958, p. 412).
9 See e.g. Godfrey- Smith (2016a); Seth (2021).
10 On the question of whether (and which) other animals dream, and its relation to questions of 
consciousness, see Peña- Guzmán (2022).
11 Bayne (2010) and Schechter (2018) oﬀer outstanding discussions of the problems of sel?ood.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
