544 
I(VO2VI() TH, 13B2I?
it creates an authoritative mandate for a particular way forward. I suspect 
there may come a point where a referendum is needed on the question of 
whether to extend certain types of welfare protection to AI, because the social 
ramiﬁcations of the decision will be absolutely vast.
Even so, I do not think this should be the default approach to issues at the 
edge of sentience, due to the need to revisit the issues periodically and when-
ever signiﬁcant new evidence emerges. Referendums cannot be easily re- run 
again and again. It is not just that they are expensive and logistically diﬃcult 
(and we can hope that, as voting technology improves, they will become eas-
ier to implement). It is also that, to produce good decisions, the voters need to 
be well informed about the issues and need to be talking about them. There 
needs to be a sustained national conversation on the issue, a reconstruction in 
macrocosm of the sort of deliberation generated in citizens’ panels.8B This 
ideal of a national conversation is extremely diﬃcult to achieve or even 
approximate, and states routinely fall a long way short of it in actual referen-
dums. It is harder still to achieve when the issue at stake is scientiﬁcally com-
plex, as with issues concerning sentience. The diﬃculty is ramped up to an 
impossibly high level if we repeatedly hold referendums on the same complex 
issue, with the public expected to consider new evidence each time.
A Common Currency
A third alternative rests on the thought that, if we could just ﬁnd the right 
currency, one that encompassed all the objectively relevant costs and beneﬁts 
with the right weightings, it would be unproblematic to leave diﬃcult trade- 
o;s in the hands of scientiﬁc experts. The experts’ personal values would 
drop out of the picture, and the only problems would be those of making sure 
the scientiﬁc experts implemented the formula correctly and with good data.
Some of my LSE colleagues have defended a technocratic approach to 
public policy of this general type: the WELLBY approach.8C A WELLBY is a 
well- being adjusted life- year, constructed in a way analogous to the QALY 
(quality- adjusted life- year) widely used in public health trade- o;s. The 
idea is that the WELLBY can serve as a universal common currency for 
policy decisions. Applied at the edge of sentience, the proposal would be that 
8B Lafont (2020).
8C De Neve et al. (2020); Layard and Oparina (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
