4 
SUMMA() O+ ,­. +(AM./O(K A1D P(OPOSA4S
cases, fetal pain relief may be appropriate. Deliberative processes for setting 
clinical norms must give appropriate weight to the voices of women.
Proposal 11. Sentience and the 14- day rule. If the main goal of setting a legal 
time limit on human embryo research were that of prohibiting research on 
human sentience candidates, a signiﬁcant liberalization of the current 14- day 
rule would still be proportionate to that goal. However, the issue raises deep 
value conﬂicts that have little to do with sentience.
Human Neural Organoids
Proposal 12. Brainstem rule. If a neural organoid develops or innervates a 
functioning brainstem (including the midbrain) that regulates arousal and 
leads to sleep- wake cycles, then it is a sentience candidate. An artiﬁcial func-
tional equivalent of a brainstem would also suﬃce.
Proposal 13. Targeted bans. If organoid research leads to the creation of orga-
noids that are sentience candidates, a moratorium (time- limited ban) or 
indeﬁnite ban on the creation of this particular type of organoid may be an 
appropriate response. Bans should avoid indiscriminate targeting of all orga-
noid research.
Proposal 14. Ethical review. When a neural organoid is a sentience candidate, 
research on it, if permitted at all, should be subject to ethical review and 
harm- beneﬁt analysis, modelled on existing frameworks for regulating 
research on sentient animals.
Other Animals
Proposal 15. All adult vertebrates are sentience candidates. Debates 
about proportionality are warranted in cases where human activities create 
risks of suﬀering to any adult vertebrate animal. Further investigation 
 concerning sentience candidature in vertebrates should focus on juvenile/
larval stages.
Proposal 16. Sentience is neither intelligence nor brain size. We should be 
aware of the possibility of decouplings between intelligence, brain size, and 
sentience in the animal kingdom. Precautions to safeguard animal welfare 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
