./) Q6)1.-O5 O3 .2)A.;)5. ,-./02A,A+ 
%K7
Kitzinger and Kitzinger’s interview studies have documented what they 
call the ‘burden of witness’ on families who watch this process occur. In some 
cases, the process of dying appears more peaceful than they had expected. 
One interviewee describes it as a ‘very calming, peaceful experience’.9F These 
reports are associated with cases in which analgesics and sedatives are skil-
fully administered in heavy doses (the same interviewee says ‘they just got the 
drugs right I think’). But the RCP guidelines caution that ‘not all deaths are 
straightforward’.9G Even in the ‘straightforward’ cases, relatives witness their 
loved ones deteriorating slowly over many days, and this can be a harrowing 
experience.
The current situation is in fact even worse than it already sounds. In cases 
where a family is understandably reluctant to contemplate CANH with-
drawal, they may still sanction other kinds of treatment withdrawal, such as 
withholding antibiotics when the patient is infected. This may sound like a 
more humane way to allow death, but the reality oAen fails to bear this out. 
One of Kitzinger and Kitzinger’s interviewees talks of the horror of watching 
a loved one ‘retch and heave and cough and be suctioned and run a high tem-
perature, perspiring all over his bed sheets’ aAer antibiotics were withheld.9H 
Another talks of their regret at having intervened to reverse a decision to 
withdraw CANH, only to witness their loved one die of gangrene two 
yearsDlater.4I
To grasp the full bleakness of the status quo, there is one more aspect we 
need to consider. All of the above is known to many doctors and to well- 
informed families when a patient is still in the acute phase of care, in the 8rst 
few days and weeks aAer their injury. At this time, they will oAen require 
mechanical ventilation. This creates what Kitzinger and Kitzinger have called 
a ‘window of opportunity’ for rapid death.41 If treatment is not withdrawn at 
this stage, no similarly rapid death will ever be possible again, given the law as 
it stands. Some families regret missing this window. The pressure on decision- 
making teams to decide quickly is ratcheted up.
Yet a patient’s prognosis is at its most uncertain at this early stage. Using 
this window to withdraw life- sustaining treatment inevitably leads to some 
deaths of patients who would otherwise have improved to a condition in 
which they would have valued continued life. Syd Johnson calls this the prob-
lem of the self- ful8lling prophecy: a bleak prognosis made extremely early, in 
9F Kitzinger and Kitzinger (2018, p. 1185).
9G Royal College of Physicians (2020, p. 153).
9H Kitzinger and Kitzinger (2015, p. 159).
4I Kitzinger and Kitzinger (2018, p. 1184).
41 Kitzinger and Kitzinger (2013).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
