2EG 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
hunting behaviours that appear to involve an element of strategic planning. 
When a Portia spider is placed on a platform from which it can see two walk-
ways leading to its prey, one with an unjumpable gap in it and one without, it 
will scan the options and then reliably choose the route with no gap, even if it 
is longer and more circuitous. This ‘detour’ behaviour has been extensively 
documented by Fiona Cross, Robert Jackson, and collaborators over many 
years.;2
Is Portia planning ahead, mentally simulating possible routes and choosing 
the one most likely to lead to reward, just as rats are ofen thought to do in 
similar circumstances?;8 Cross, Jackson, and colleagues :nd this the best 
explanation of their data. Louise Barrett has criticized this idea, arguing that 
Portia is more likely to be implementing a line- break detection algorithm 
characterized by three simple rules: keep scanning in the same direction until 
a break in a horizontal line is detected; if a break is detected, change the 
direction of scanning; walk in the direction that was most strongly :xated 
during scanning.;9 Cross and Jackson replied that this explanation does not 
explain all aspects of the behaviour, such as the observation that Portia will 
take the shorter and more direct of two paths, when able to choose between 
two unbroken paths.;;
This does not settle the issue: it is easy to imagine a critic :ring back with a 
more elaborate algorithm to explain the additional data. But we should be 
clear about where exactly the disagreement lies. The disagreement is not over 
whether Portia is implementing an algorithm (all agree there is computation 
involved), but one about whether the algorithm is performing a form of pro-
spective simulation or simply applying a set of heuristic rules that shortcut 
the need for simulation. That debate is challenging to adjudicate without the 
sort of neurophysiological data that seem to tilt the balance of evidence 
towards simulation in the case of rats. Clearly, though, these experiments give 
us reason to think it would be well worth trying sentience- related paradigms 
with Portia, such as conditioned place avoidance experiments and mo tiv-
ation al trade- oﬀ experiments. More lines of evidence would start to give us a 
case resembling that already made for insects.
Some of Cross and Jackson’s experiments also point towards a form of 
short- term memory in Portia. In one experiment, they presented Portia with 
a prey item, allowed the spider to position itself ready for an attack, then hid 
;2 Cross and Jackson (2014, 2016, 2019); Cross et al. (2020).
;8 On rats, see Redish (2016).
;9 L. Barrett (2011).
;; Cross and Jackson (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
