-U4/)C -,/)C5 AND -R)MA(0 -,/)C)0. 
767
My hope is that, if a panel of at least 150 citizens debated proportionality in 
relation to a speciﬁc issue following the structure provided, arriving by con-
sensus or by majority vote at a single policy response, we could have conﬁ-
dence in the results. We could be conﬁdent that the major considerations 
would have received dedicated and extended deliberation, that the people 
doing the deliberating were su?ciently informed and appropriately repre-
sentative of the values of the population, and that they were able to apply 
those values to the questions being posed.
This, then, is the seventh (and last) element of my precautionary frame-
work for managing risks at the edge of sentience:
An example of an informed, inclusive, democratic process is a citizens’ 
panel or assembly that assesses the proportionality of proposed measures 
by debating their permissibility- in- principle, adequacy, reasonable 
necessity and consistency (the PARC tests).
8.4 Public Policy and Private Policies
We have been considering how a government could conduct an inclusive, 
democratic process to assess proportionality at the edge of sentience. But 
what about organizations at a smaller scale than the state? Should they simply 
wait for the state to act, even if that means waiting decades?
In fact, many of the ideas developed in Chapters 6–8, though developed 
with the state in mind as the ideal implementing agent, might be implemented 
in other, non- ideal ways at smaller scales. There are three main non- ideal 
ways I have in mind. First, organizations can conduct their own versions of 
citizens’ panels, to generate advice about proportionality to guide their own 
internal regulations. For example, a university, funding organization, or inde-
pendent ethics body could conduct a citizens’ panel to consider proportional-
ity in the context of organoid research. Such panels should still aspire to 
openness; they should still make sure the list of options put to the panel has 
been subject to open consultation. This would involve only a slight scaling up 
of the recent public dialogues conducted by the Nu?eld Council on Bioethics, 
mentioned at the start of Chapter 6.
Second, organizations without the resources to conduct citizens’ panels 
can still apply the PARC tests in small panels involving at least some ordinary 
citizens (or ‘lay members’). In the UK, Animal Welfare Ethical Review Boards 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
