77O 
4E;,3L ­,234­/50
11.6 The Brainstem Rule
There is one important piece of common ground in this area. All reasonable 
views compatible with the scientiﬁc meta- consensus can agree that, in a human 
brain, there can be no sentience in the absence of a functioning midbrain, at the 
top of the brainstem. Of special importance is the reticular activating system, a 
network of midbrain neurons that project to the thalamus. Agreement that the 
midbrain is needed is much wider than agreement about why this is the case. 
For the midbrain- centric family of theories, these mech an isms are suIcient 
for sentience even without a cortex. For the cortex- centric family, midbrain 
mechanisms are causally but not constitutively involved. Their destruction ‘pulls 
the plug’ on consciousness, leading to irreversible coma, even though they are 
not themselves the basis of the conscious state.
All parties can agree, however, that the total loss of functionality in these 
systems implies the loss of the ability to sustain consciousness. Without a 
functional brainstem and reticular activating system, a human cannot main-
tain coordinated patterns of global cortical activity, integrative subcortical 
activity, or sleep- wake cycles. Standard clinical criteria for brain death test for 
this by looking for coma (unrousable unresponsiveness), the loss of brain-
stem reﬂexes, and apnea (the loss of any spontaneous eﬀort to breathe).16 
These criteria have been a source of some controversy, because there is evi-
dence that some brain lesions impair outwardly detectable brainstem reﬂexes 
while leaving the reticular activating system intact.1E But note the agreement 
behind the disagreement: both sides agree the midbrain and reticular activating 
system are essential— the disagreement concerns whether standard clin ic al 
criteria reliably detect their loss of function. This common ground has major 
clinical signiﬁcance, because it makes organ donation possible. It is because 
there is a robust consensus around the idea that the death of the brainstem, 
when correctly diagnosed, implies the irreversible loss of the capacity for 
conscious experience that doctors are legally permitted to remove organs and 
tissues from patients who are brain dead.
This common ground supports the widespread view that current neural 
organoids are not sentience candidates right now. The ‘plug’ is permanently 
pulled on an organoid, as it were: they entirely lack a midbrain and reticular 
activating system. But this also gives us one threshold for the point at which 
neural organoids will become sentience candidates. If an organoid is devel-
oped that has a functioning brainstem, including a reticular activating system 
16 Greer et al. (2020).
1E Walter et al. (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
