27­+:73 73T)2,7T+E)6 
6G
Russellian monism, if true, would leave questions about the edge of sen-
tience substantially open— as open as they are on any other philosophical 
picture. It would not imply, for example, that all animals are sentient, pro-
vided sentience is deﬁned as the capacity to form whole- animal, valenced, 
macro-conscious states. What it takes to form these states would still be an 
open question, and much the same question that anyone else would ask, but 
with the term ‘macro- conscious’ where others would say ‘conscious’.
Biopsychism
Many have entertained the idea that sentience might be present in all living 
things, including unicellular organisms. This idea that life itself suﬃces for 
sentience, even in the absence of a nervous system, can be called biopsychism 
(the term may sometimes also be taken to imply that non- living things cannot 
be sentient, but that is not how I am using it here).
It is not clear how to relate such a view to the traditional materialism/dual-
ism/panpsychism axis of disagreement. Because biopsychism is primarily a 
bold claim about the distribution of sentience in the natural world, I think it 
is most naturally interpreted as compatible with any of the standard positions 
on the mind- body problem, none of which is committed to any particular 
view on the distribution of sentience. A biopsychist could, in principle, be a 
single- kind materialist who holds that the relevant kind is present in all life, 
a  dualist who holds that psychophysical laws are at work in all life, or a 
Russellian monist who holds that all life achieves combination. Biopsychism, 
then, is not a fourth way, but a logically independent claim.
In recent decades, biopsychism has mainly been championed by theorists 
within the ‘autopoiesis’ tradition, a body of work that seeks to make sense of 
the nature of life in terms of ‘a self- producing organization that dynamically 
maintains itself through time and constant material turnover’.3K Although the 
connection to sentience strikes many readers (including me) as far from obvi-
ous, others see a close relationship. Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, for 
instance, once claimed:
Not just animals are conscious, but every organic being, every autopoietic 
cell is conscious. In the simplest sense, consciousness is an awareness of the 
3K Thompson (2022, p. 233). Godfrey- Smith (2016a) has entertained a version of biopsychism 
(though without endorsing it), leading to criticism from Rosenberg (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
