M6N 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
begin at conception but initially share the same cells). We also need not 
accept that the moment an individual begins is the same in twinned and non- 
twinned cases.
What was really going on in the Warnock report? I cannot imagine for a 
moment that the committee was persuaded by a metaphysical argument 
based on three questionable premises. I think what happened is that the 
14- day rule was a compromise that a majority of the committee found stra-
tegic al ly acceptable. In rationalizing their compromise, I suspect Warnock 
and colleagues wanted to present the recommendation as principled rather 
than wholly pragmatic, and this led them to the idea of the primitive streak as 
having special metaphysical and ethical signiﬁcance.
The Warnock report did not achieve the kind of overlapping consensus I 
have suggested we should be aiming for. It achieved something else: a stra-
tegic compromise among conﬂicting views, publicly justiﬁed using peculiar 
reasons that were not common ground at all, and that could only seem com-
pelling from one idiosyncratic metaphysical vantage point. The underlying 
value conﬂicts were not resolved, and the public was not substantially 
involved in the discussion. The value- judgements were made by a cadre of 
experts with a small minority of lay members, in an instance of what I 
lamented in Chapter 7 as the ‘tyranny of expert values’. And yet this strategic 
compromise has lasted forty years.
Is this a problem for the idea that an overlapping consensus is more stable 
than a strategic compromise? Maybe. But it may also be that the 14- day rule 
has persisted not because it has solid ethical or public support, but rather 
because it achieved the appearance of a tough constraint while, in practice, 
granting scientists ample headroom to exploit the currently available technol-
ogy. It was only in 2016 that researchers actually became able to sustain 
embryos for 14 days.5E From that time onwards, calls began for the law to be 
changed to extend the time limit to at least 28 days.6F In 2021, the International 
Society for Stem Research dropped its support for the 14- day rule: not a 
change in the law, but a major change in international good- practice norms.61
The case shows us some of the potential costs of failing to resolve our value 
conﬂicts democratically, inclusively, and for the long term. Yes, the 14- day 
rule provided a surprisingly enduring compromise, because for a long time it 
failed to constrain scientiﬁc research in any signiﬁcant way. But that does not 
5E Deglincerti et al. (2016); Shahbazi et al. (2016).
6F Appleby and Bredenoord (2018); Chan (2017); Hurlbut et al. (2017); McCully (2021); NuJeld 
Council on Bioethics (2017).
61 Subbaraman (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
