TH( PQ-CA0 /U1( A.C B(.T,(.)( 
M66
make it a long- term stable solution to the ethical problem. For proponents of 
embryo research who want to see the technology exploited to its full poten-
tial, 14 days no longer seems like a good place for strategic compromise. So, 
that compromise is now fraying, leading to renewed conﬂict. There is also no 
reason to think that a shif to 28 days would permanently settle the issue. We 
can instead expect proponents of embryo research to campaign for later and 
later legal limits as technology continues to improve. On each occasion, the 
campaign will be more likely to succeed if it seeks a small enough extension 
to avoid signiﬁcant public concern.
For critics, this is exactly the sort of long- term trajectory they feared all 
along, and one they see as vindicating their initial scepticism about the whole 
idea of research on human embryos.6: This is a case where the ‘slippery slope’ 
metaphor may actually be apt. Warnock herself, reﬂecting towards the end of 
her life on the continuing case for the 14- day rule, put the point in these 
terms.6; As noted in Chapter 9, slippery slope arguments are sometimes falla-
cious. But when the metaphor is being used to describe a socio- political phe-
nomenon— in which interest groups campaign for a series of incremental 
policy changes, each too small by itself to provoke a backlash from a popula-
tion with many other demands on its attention, but adding up to a change 
that would have prompted serious public concern if implemented all at 
once— the metaphor is capturing a real problem that democracies face. 
Through strings of small incremental changes, democratic societies can be 
pulled in directions that are misaligned with the public’s values. It is rea son-
able to worry that this could happen in the case of embryo research.64
10.7 The 14-Day Rule and Sentience
What if the legal limit on embryo research had been set not on the basis of 
the alleged signiﬁcance of the primitive streak, but on considerations to do 
with sentience? Such considerations did play a subsidiary role in the Warnock 
report. The position that these are the considerations that really matter was 
there described as the ‘strictly utilitarian’ position. This strikes me as a mis-
nomer. Certainly, utilitarianism is one example of an ethical outlook that 
would see the potential sentience of the embryo as the main risk to be 
6: Blackshaw and Rodger (2021).
6; Warnock (2017).
64 When a series of small changes is deliberately pursued for strategic reasons, the macabre meta-
phor of ‘boiling the frog’ is also used. But I think in most cases, including this one, the slide down the 
slope is not the result of a deliberate long- term strategy.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
