343L­2/E0 K/() E.L,M­0 
77N
Marcello Massimini have called an ‘island of awareness’, unable to manifest its 
sentience in any of the usual ways.12 In this case, there is no behaviour, so we 
need to assess sentience candidature using only non- behavioural markers. 
Where do we even begin?
11.5 Analogies with Embryos
Here is one false start.13 The issue is sometimes linked to that of human 
embryos and fetuses. The hope seems to be that we can use our understand-
ing of when sentience arises in normal human development to guide our 
thinking about organoids. But I am sceptical of this idea, because our under-
standing of how sentience normally develops is profoundly limited.
Julian Koplin and Julian Savulescu have argued that, because ‘we can be 
reasonably conﬁdent that a neural organoid lacks even a rudimentary form of 
consciousness until it resembles the brain of a fetus at 20 weeks’ development’ 
no additional regulation should be required for research on organoids that 
are equivalent to a fetal brain at 20 weeks or less.14 Although Koplin and 
Savulescu take this to be erring ‘on the side of generosity’, I do not share their 
conﬁdence about these cases. Given the obvious and appropriate ethical con-
straints on research on human fetuses, our knowledge of when sentience 
begins remains subject to severe uncertainty. As we saw in Chapter 10, 
Derbyshire and Bockmann have suggested that, to err on the side of caution, 
we should regard fetuses as potentially sentient from 12 weeks, since this is 
the time of the ﬁrst known projections from the thalamus into the cortical 
subplate.1?
This approach, unfortunately, substitutes one kind of severe uncertainty 
for another. We should not use highly uncertain and contested estimates 
about human fetuses as a guide to the ethics of neural organoid research. 
Those estimates cannot carry this sort of weight. Instead, we should hope 
information will ﬂow primarily in the opposite direction: we should look for 
markers of sentience in organoids, make inferences about the properties that 
lead to a realistic possibility of sentience in organoids, and then use this evi-
dence to formulate better policies regarding human fetuses.
That brings us back to square one. If we have neither behaviour nor ana-
logy to draw upon, what are the relevant markers of sentience?
12 Bayne et al. (2020).
13 In this section I draw on Birch and Browning (2021).
14 Koplin and Savulescu (2019, p. 762).
1? Derbyshire and Bockmann (2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
