­+6782))+,8 2)76/,7.30 7./9T 6),T+),:) 
4A
Moral Views beyond the Pale
Here is a third caricature, this time of someone who behaves unreasonably in 
the ethical rather than the epistemic domain. Imagine someone proposes that 
we should be trying to maximize the su!ering of all the animals on the planet. 
A4er all, we are the Earth’s top species, its ultimate apex predator, and it is 
only right for an apex predator to aspire to make its victims su!er as much as 
possible, so as to instil maximum fear.
You would not take this person seriously— why not? Not because you know 
the one true ethical theory and you know it to be incompatible with their 
view. No one is in that position. The situation is rather this: for all our dis-
agree ment about ethical matters, we can all recognize some views as so 
abhorrent that they do not belong in the space of reasonable ethical dis agree-
ment. They belong outside that space, beyond the pale. Debate will be 
derailed if we give signiﬁcant airtime to these outlooks. We have no good 
reason to explore the ﬁner details of such views. We are entitled to reject them 
without discussion. To make a practical recommendation on the basis of such 
a view is another way of being unreasonable.
In short, it is not reasonable to base a serious proposal for society- wide 
action on empirically unconstrained speculation, on dogmatic unresponsive-
ness to evidence, or on a morally abhorrent background view. However, this 
still leaves plenty of room for reasonable disagreement about what to do 
regarding cases at the edge of sentience. Indeed, we will never get away from 
it. This is partly because our evidence is inconclusive, and partly also because 
there is so much variation in human values. But the zone of reasonable dis-
agree ment is not boundless. It is circumscribed by the need for positive evi-
dence in favour of any course of action one recommends, by the need for 
open- mindedness about following the evidence where it leads, and by the 
need for values that fall within an acceptable range. Not every possible view 
about sentience has a place in that zone.
I will use the term ‘zone of reasonable disagreement’ in a deliberately broad 
way. The zone includes reasonable scientiﬁc disagreement about the neural 
mechanisms linked to sentience in the human brain. As we will see, there are 
very di!erent views about the neural basis of sentience that all have some 
credible evidence in their favour. None of these views can be dismissed as 
evidence- free speculation (Chapter 5). The zone also includes reasonable 
disagreement (part scientiﬁc, part metaphysical) about how radically a sys-
tem can diﬀer from a healthy, adult human brain and still support sentience. 
For example, it includes reasonable disagreement about whether or not 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
