67L 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
of ‘viability’ has played an important legal role. A fetus typically becomes 
viable outside the womb (albeit with intensive neonatal care) at around 22–24 
weeks, lining up with the legal threshold in the UK and Australia.1E One prob-
lem with this way of drawing the line is that it introduces a strange coupling 
between the legal threshold and medical technology. Medical progress has 
already led to a situation where neonates can survive at 22 or 23 weeks,:F 
down from 28 weeks, the legal limit implied by the UK’s Abortion Act 1967, 
and down too from the ﬁgure of 24 weeks to which the limit was moved in 
1991. If future technology allows neonates to be viable outside the womb at 
ever earlier time points, then viability- based legal thresholds may end up 
pushed to ever earlier time points. This would be hard to justify from an eth-
ic al point of view, since it is diJcult to explain why the moral status of a fetus 
inside the womb should depend on the medical technology that happens to 
exist outside the womb.:1
A third option, concomitant with the position that personhood grounds 
the right to life, involves tying the legal limit to the onset of personhood. For 
this to work, however, there is a need for a theory of personhood detailed 
enough to pinpoint its emergence during development. We currently lack any 
such theory, so it is not clear what the view implies regarding appropriate 
legal limits. Moreover, it seems entirely possible that a good theory of person-
hood would imply a gradual developmental transition involving borderline 
cases, leaving us with the problem of how to make sense of our obligations 
regarding those borderline cases.:: One way to handle these problems would 
be to construct an intentionally sharpened- up concept of a ‘personhood can-
didate’, analogous to the concept of a sentience candidate constructed in this 
book, with the boundaries of personhood candidature drawn deliberately 
inclusively to facilitate precautionary thinking. But that is a project for 
another occasion.
These matters are substantially unresolved, but they are not primarily 
questions of sentience. Keeping issues of sentience separate, as far as possible, 
from issues of abortion policy is important, because it creates space for a dis-
cussion about fetal sentience that is not crowded out by the political contro-
versy surrounding abortion law, especially in the US context, where the 
overturning of Roe v. Wade has led to enormous state- by- state variation. I say 
1E See Romanis (2020) for discussion of the ways in which ‘viability’ is deﬁned in law. See https://
reproductiverights.org/maps/worlds- abortion- laws/ for a summary of the world’s abortion laws. The 
picture in America is changing rapidly following the Supreme Court’s overturning of Roe v. Wade.
:F Di Stefano et al. (2021).
:1 Gordon (2008).
:: Greasley (2017). The same may be true of sentience, a possibility considered in Chapter 3.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
