4L 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
discussed in Part IV). Unfortunately, we cannot pretend that the conscious/
unconscious distinction maps neatly onto the distinction between pathways 
that involve the brain and pathways that do not. We also need to consider the 
possibility of pathways that run via the brain, involve positive or negative 
evaluations of a stimulus, and drive approach or avoidance behaviours, all 
while remaining fully unconscious. These pathways— if they exist— are the 
aﬀective analogues of the mechanisms of blindsight. We could describe them 
as ‘unconscious valence’, though I would prefer to call them ‘unconscious 
functional analogues of valenced experiences’. But the label is unimportant. 
The deeper question is methodological. How can we reliably disentangle 
valenced experiences from their unconscious functional analogues?
Attempts to disentangle valenced experience from its unconscious func-
tional analogues o7en draw inspiration from the case of vision. In ‘aﬀective 
priming’ studies, an aﬀectively salient stimulus (such as an angry or happy 
face) is presented to subjects in two ways: subliminally (i.e. reported unseen) 
and supraliminally (i.e. reported as seen). One apparently robust message 
from these studies is that some autonomic arousal responses traditionally 
interpreted as ‘fear responses’, such as breaking out in a sweat (as measured 
by skin conductance), can be evoked by a subliminal stimulus. Indeed, when 
the stimulus is reported as seen, these responses tend to be weaker even 
though the stimulus itself is stronger, perhaps indicating top- down inhibition 
of arousal (you know it’s just a picture, so why be afraid?).1B Meanwhile, in 
studies of so- called ‘aﬀective blindsight’, an aﬀectively salient stimulus is pre-
sented to a blindsight patient’s blind ﬁeld. Subjects say they saw nothing, but 
are nonetheless able to guess the valence of the stimulus (e.g. happy or angry) 
better than chance.2C
These studies, in relying on subliminal visual stimuli, are subject to the 
same sources of uncertainty as studies solely concerned with vision. It is hard 
to be sure that the perceptual processing was genuinely unconscious, given 
the criterion problem discussed earlier. Even granting that the stimuli were 
unconsciously perceived, there is also the challenge of showing that the aﬀ ect-
ive part of the pathway, and not just the perceptual part, occurred non- 
consciously. Pathways that are unconscious at the perceptual stage do not 
have to stay that way to the end. The possibility of unconscious vision elicit-
ing subcortical activity which is then experienced as conscious aﬀect is hard 
to rule out.21 Indeed, in one aﬀective blindsight study, researchers found that 
1B Tamietto and de Gelder (2010).
2C Celeghin et al. (2015); Hamm et al. (2003).
21 Berridge (2004).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
