2L( B,.6-.)- C()CE/23 
%K7
The question of what counts as a ‘substantial enough evidence base’ is a 
subtle one, calling for case- speciﬁc criteria and expert judgement. The search 
for appropriate criteria in diﬀerent cases will be one major theme of Parts 
III–IV of the book (alongside the question of what to do when our criteria are 
satisﬁed). Not much can be said in general about this, because the cases pre-
sent such diﬀerent challenges. What can be said is that we must have a sub-
stantial base of positive evidence, not just an inability to conclusively rule out 
sentience. ‘Inability to conclusively rule out’ is too low a bar when our the or-
et ic al understanding of sentience is still so immature. Nothing would be ruled 
out. At the same time, we do not need certainty or even knowledge. We need 
not even have established that S is likely to be sentient. We just need enough 
evidence to imply a realistic possibility, and to allow the identiﬁcation of wel-
fare risks and the design and assessment of precautions.
There are two main types of situation in which a system can fail to be a 
sentience candidate. One is a situation in which there is clear evidence that it 
lacks a functioning forebrain, functioning midbrain, or anything relevantly 
analogous to either structure, according to any serious, credible theory of 
what the relevant analogies are. We can entertain the possibility of biopsy-
chism in the seminar room, but current theories that have a su8cient amount 
of evidence in their favour to elevate them above seminar- room speculation 
do give a crucial role to the forebrain, midbrain, or both (incidentally, this 
includes empirical IIT, which gives a crucial role to the posterior cortical hot 
zone). The other type of situation in one in which there is simply a total or 
near- total lack of evidence one way or the other, making it impossible to 
mount a credible, evidence- based case either for or against sentience.
A medically important example of the ﬁrst type of case is a patient who is 
brain dead.;J In a brain dead person, cardiorespiratory function may persist 
for a time. The spinal cord may still be functional but it is not able to generate 
experiences without the brain. What remains is not su8cient for sentience on 
any view in the R1–R5 space. This is why doctors are legally permitted to 
remove organs and tissues from registered organ donors who are brain dead, 
saving countless human lives. Courts will not entertain people arguing for 
biopsychism in this context— and thank goodness. They are correct to set 
aside highly speculative views when such grave decisions are being made.
This is perhaps the most signiﬁcant illustration of the idea that a hidden 
meta- consensus exists regarding the parameters of reasonable debate when 
;J Establishing brain death is not always straightforward. See Greer et al. (2020); Walter et al. 
(2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
