+6 :/,6:+/96 )D1)2+),:) /,) M+,­ /2 M7,0F 
B;
dismiss this idea. But if they didn’t secretly believe it, why would they still be 
arguing?
The ability of a ‘many kinds’ view to defuse heated debates is an attractive 
feature. Yet, if this view is correct, it leads to a puzzle about the ethical signiﬁ-
cance of sentience. Sentience is ethically signiﬁcant; that is why we worry 
about whether it is present or absent. And phenomenal consciousness is a 
crucial component of sentience (Chapter 2). So, which of the kinds that par-
tially attract the reference of ‘phenomenal consciousness’ underlie the ethical 
signiﬁcance of sentience and why? For example, if we accept the C1/C2 view, 
which kind is associated with states that matter ethically: C1 or C2? Is either 
one of them (i.e. their disjunction) enough to ground moral status? Are both 
needed (i.e. their conjunction)? These questions are pressing, since these 
properties are likely to have very di!erent distributions in the natural world. 
Moreover, in the future, AI may have one but not the other. The option space 
is larger still if we shi4 from two kinds to more than two.2I
Defenders of a ‘many kinds’ view cannot just ignore these questions, but 
nor can they easily answer them. There will be a temptation to say: it is surely 
whichever kind is associated with feeling, with experience, that inherits the 
ethical role. But it is part of the ‘many kinds’ view that there is no further fact 
about this. If we posited a further fact, the picture would change into a form 
of dualism, and consciousness would (unambiguously) be the kind associated 
with feeling and experience. The ‘many kinds’ picture is not this. It is a picture 
on which ordinary terms like ‘feeling’ and ‘experience’ gesture in de ter min-
ate ly towards two or more kinds. I can see no way to resolve the question of 
ethical signiﬁcance in an acceptable way, given these assumptions— a troub-
ling situation.2K
One radical option for the ‘many kinds’ materialist is to deny that sentience 
has ethical signiﬁcance.2L That way, the failure of these terms to pick out a 
unique natural kind would not leave ethical questions with indeterminate 
answers. We might, for example, pursue a view on which valence is the non- 
conceptual representation of value (and not essentially conscious) and on 
which all valenced states matter ethically to the same degree whether con-
scious or not. Yet if we take that path, we will have to accept that, if AI systems 
have valenced states, they thereby have morally signiﬁcant interests on a par 
with any other bearer of valenced states, even if the states in question are 
2I He (2023) has proposed a far more pluralistic view.
2K Birch (2022a).
2L An option explored in recent work by Kammerer (2022) and Dung (2022), and supported by 
Carruthers (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
