76B 
D04A()NG -R,-,R(),NA/)(5
(or AWERBs) already include some ordinary citizens, but I know from per-
sonal conversations that lay members sometimes feel marginalized by experts 
and unsure of their role. The PARC tests would give such members at least 
parity in discussions of proportionality, since the evaluative questions at the 
heart of the tests are questions anyone can answer in light of their own values.
Third, in cases where small groups or single individuals make decisions 
with little time or resources— think of a PI setting rules for their own lab, a 
CEO of a tech start- up setting rules for AI developers, or a chef setting rules 
for their kitchen— the sort of process just described might still serve as an 
ideal to be kept in mind. Even a single individual can ask: Do my decisions 
plausibly line up with what a more inclusive process would have decided, had 
there been time to conduct one? Could I justify my decisions to such a panel?
This merely imagined version of the citizens’ panel is far from the standard 
of inclusiveness to which we should aspire. We should try to avoid this poor 
substitute wherever possible. I am thinking of cases where a decision- maker 
simply lacks the time and/or resources to attempt an inclusive and demo-
cratic process, not cases where a decision- maker has the time and resources 
but ﬁnds the prospect inconvenient.9A
8.5 Philosopher as Sage, Philosopher as Proposer
What is the role of philosophy in this? It might seem as though I have eﬀaced 
my own discipline’s expertise. Having owned up to our lack of special access 
to a realm of objective ethical facts, should we now retreat to silence, leaving 
these matters to scientiﬁc experts and the general public? That is not what I 
am suggesting, for two reasons.
First, I think philosophers (especially ethicists and philosophers of science) 
can be sources of valuable expert input to deliberative processes. It is just that 
our role is not that of a sage, telling the public how best to resolve its value con-
ﬂicts. Our role can instead be that of an explainer or elucidator: we are well 
placed to explain what the major value conﬂicts are, how these conﬂicts have 
arisen and changed over time, and how problems of consistency arise and may 
be resolved. We are also well placed to tease out the value- judgements that lie 
9A Here, incidentally, I disagree with Philip Kitcher, who appears to suggest it is enough for decisions 
to line- up with the counterfactual decisions an appropriately inclusive, mutually engaged conversation 
would have reached. In my view, counterfactual conversations are not enough to guard against a 
tyranny of expert values. Only actual conversations can do that job, a point Kitcher, in more recent 
work with Gillian Barker, appears to endorse. See Barker and Kitcher (2014); Kitcher (2001, 2011b).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
