() 
ET,-./ 012 3E4-5-61
You can think a non- sentient form of life deserves some minimal level of 
moral consideration and yet still think it appropriate to prioritize the interests 
of the sentient.
For example, forced to choose between the interests of a sentient dog and 
those of the non- sentient bacteria that have infected it, we must prioritize the 
interests of the dog by administering antibiotics. Animal welfare laws rightly 
force us to prioritize the sentient in such scenarios. They do not leave us with 
a free choice between the dog and its bacteria. That would be morally beyond 
the pale.
I suggest, moreover, that the relevant type of priority is lexical priority. 
This means that even the smallest interest of a single sentient being can out-
weigh even the gravest interests of any number of non- sentient microorgan-
isms. A vet who asks ‘How many bacteria exactly?’ and has some threshold 
beyond which they would shif to prioritizing the bacteria is acting 
unethically— and asking one question too many. Rejecting sentience as a 
strictly necessary condition for moral standing, while accepting it as grounds 
for lexical priority, is still a view ultimately quite close to sentientism.
When a sentient being is compared with an individual non- sentient organ-
ism, the former deserves priority, but what if we instead consider whole eco-
systems? For ‘ecocentrists’, the needs of whole ecosystems properly take 
priority over those of individuals.7 Yet this view faces the challenge of explain-
ing what counts as a morally signiﬁcant ecosystem. Its defenders need to 
explain, in particular, why microbial ecosystems— such as the bioﬁlms on our 
teeth, or a bacterial infection in a dog— can be legitimately destroyed to pro-
mote the interests of a single sentient being. One option would be to appeal to 
the irreplaceability of the ecosystem, but this leads us to the diﬃcult territory 
of producing criteria for irreplaceability. A diﬀerent option for the ecocentrist 
is to turn back towards sentience: intuitively, the most valuable ecosystems 
are those that teem with sentient life, not just microbes. This can be a point of 
agreement with the sentientist, who maintains that the source of an ecosys-
tem’s ethical signiﬁcance is the sentient life it contains. There may still be dis-
agreement regarding how much weight to give to the well- being of sentient 
animals in relation to other goals, such as preserving biodiversity, but these 
disagreements can occur against a background of substantial agreement 
about the relevance of sentience.8
7 Callicott (2015); Leopold (1949); Taylor (1981). In a variant on ecocentrism, Palmer (2009) has 
argued that species are individuals with moral status.
8 Mikkelson (2018) stresses that the well- being of individual sentient organisms does still matter 
on the most in9uential versions of ecocentrism. It is just that other things, such as biodiversity, also 
matter, so that the value of an ecosystem must be assessed holistically.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
