5M9 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
By contrast, Panksepp’s alternative, midbrain- centric theory meshes well 
with the heterodox interpretation of blindsight defended by Merker and 
Phillips, on which blindsight involves residual but degraded conscious 
ex peri ence supported by midbrain mechanisms. Panksepp posited seven core 
types of aﬀective circuit, each associated with its own form of ‘raw aﬀective 
experience’: +EEP,N3, 0E.G, G.3E, (.GE, 2-+%, N.N,(, and N2.Y. These raw 
feelings, he argued, were generated primarily by mechanisms in the midbrain, 
at the top of the brainstem, and ‘require no “readout” by a higher cognitive 
apparatus’.8; He proposed that a speciﬁc midbrain area, the periaqueductal 
gray (PAG), plays a central role in generating these ex peri ences. The PAG, he 
hypothesized, ‘lies at the very root of many integrated aﬀective feelings of the 
brain’.85 This region is one of the ‘triad of large structures’ Merker’s theory 
takes to be at the core of the neural basis of conscious experience, underlining 
the strong a6nity between the two theories.86
As Panksepp himself o7en emphasized, a midbrain- centred theory of 
aﬀective experiences suggests, on the face of it, that these experiences are very 
widespread across the animal kingdom, since midbrain structures such as the 
PAG are found in all vertebrates,87 and the central complex in the brains of 
insects and other arthropods performs somewhat substantially analogous 
functions.8A It is a fundamental commitment of Panksepp’s theory that the 
seven core aﬀective circuits are at least universal across all mammals, so that, 
for example, the circuits that drive rough- and- tumble play in rats are hom-
olo gous with those driving the same behaviour seen in human children. The 
existence of the same basic experiences beyond the mammalian case was 
something Panksepp consistently described as an open empirical question, 
plausible but not proven.8B
What evidence convinced Panksepp that midbrain circuits were enough by 
themselves for conscious aﬀective experiences, albeit of a ‘raw’ type? Three 
main lines of evidence stand out. Panksepp was especially moved by the 
observation that:
it is next to impossible to evoke aﬀective responses via localized electrical 
stimulation of the neocortex . . . . By contrast, coherent and powerful 
8; Panksepp (2005, p. 64).
85 Panksepp (1998b, p. 571).
86 Solms (2021) oﬀers a synthesis of the two, though with an additional, third main ingredient, 
namely predictive processing.
87 Kittelberger and colleagues have argued that the PAG of teleost ﬁsh is ‘convergent in both its 
functional and structural organization to the PAG of mammals’ (Kittelberger et al. 2006, p. 71). This 
topic is revisited in Chapter 12.
8A Barron and Klein (2016); Klein and Barron (2016).
8B Panksepp (2016).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
