KL 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
towards a more mature understanding that will allow a better concept to be 
constructed. By way of analogy, biology has started with loose notions of 
‘function’, ‘adaptation’, ‘cooperation’, and ‘altruism’ that gesture at real 
phenomena— and has then tightened up these concepts in the light of evolu-
tionary theory, so that much more precise de!nitions can be given.17 We 
should want consciousness science to eventually do the same to ‘phenomenal 
consciousness’. It is just that, from where we are now, various directions of 
travel are possible, and the right successor notion will depend on which path 
is taken (Chapters 3 and 5).
Sometimes we should accept strain on a !eld’s central concept as a marker 
of the !eld’s immaturity and work to address it over the long term rather than 
letting the concept (and the !eld) shatter.18 We should resist the impulse to 
say ‘a concept this contested can’t be used for anything important!’. Attempting 
to capture what it is that the whole !eld of consciousness science aims to 
understand is an important task, and this is what the ‘phenomenal conscious-
ness’ concept does. We should hold on to it, while at the same time allowing 
diﬀerent groups of theorists to develop their own candidates for more the or-
et ic al ly loaded successor notions.
2.3 Aﬀective Space
Let us turn now to the second part of the de!nition: the valence part. Why 
‘valence’ and not the more familiar ‘emotion’? In short, the idea of ‘valenced 
experience’ is more general in some respects than ‘emotion’, and the extra 
generality is useful. At the same time, it helps us zoom in on the aspect of 
emotional experience that matters most.
‘Emotion’ covers a lot, I admit. Happiness, fear, anxiety, joy, boredom, sur-
prise, excitement, comfort, panic, dread, jealousy, guilt, grief . . . we have many, 
many concepts for our emotions. I always enjoy discovering words in other 
languages for emotions that have no English equivalent, such as hygge 
(Danish), the feeling of comfort and cosiness experienced when enjoying 
food or drink with friends or family, or koi no yokan (Japanese), ‘the feeling 
upon !rst meeting someone that you will inevitably fall in love with them’.19
17 Lewens (2007a, 2007b). This is a rare point of contact with the rather more stable conceptual 
terrain of my previous book, The Philosophy of Social Evolution (Birch 2017d, ch. 1).
18 I have made the same point in relation to the concept of ‘animal welfare’, which is similarly 
pulled in diﬀerent directions by diﬀerent research programmes (Birch 2022b).
19 BBC Culture (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
