)3K 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
The Committee held a series of meetings to explore the issue. They arrived 
at a recommendation that, in hindsight, struck a rather odd compromise 
between con:icting views:
The Committee has concluded that the scientiﬁc evidence currently 
avail able is insuﬃcient to suggest with any certainty that cephalopods can 
experience pain and suﬀering. [. . .] However, a clear majority of the Committee 
believe that there is suﬃcient doubt about the sentient status of ceph alo-
pods, to give the beneﬁt of that doubt to one species, Octopus vulgaris, about 
which most is known and which is of particular concern.22
ASPA was amended accordingly: a single cephalopod species was brought 
within its scope. This ruling led to the concept of the octopus as an ‘honorary 
vertebrate’ for the purposes of the act. Why just one species? It is virtually 
impossible to imagine that the Committee, having taken advice from ceph-
alo pod experts, was unaware that there are many species of octopus (about 
three hundred) within the order Octopoda. Yet to protect a single species 
seems inconsistent with the approach taken to vertebrates, where evidence 
from a small number of laboratory species is used to justify much wider- 
ranging protections for other relevantly similar animals.
Despite this oddity, the advice was an important milestone in the legal pro-
tection of invertebrate welfare. An invertebrate was protected by law for the 
ﬁrst time in the UK, and (as far as I know) for the ﬁrst time anywhere. 
Moreover, the recommendation involved an incipient form of precautionary 
thinking. The Committee noted, correctly, that certainty could not be 
achieved in this area, but went on to argue that the beneﬁt of the doubt should 
be given on the side of ascribing sentience in a policy- making context, given 
signiﬁcant welfare concerns.
The evidence base available in the early 1990s was signiﬁcantly thinner 
than that available now. The Committee pointed out that octopuses have a 
‘large neurological mass’, ‘complex nervous systems and behaviour’, and a 
‘general level of organization’ suggesting that ‘octopuses might well be able to 
experience pain’. Thirty years later, we can point to a rich body of evidence 
investigating possible markers of pain in coleoid cephalopods, including 
cuttle ﬁsh and squid as well as octopuses, much of it quite recent.23 Some of 
that evidence will be described below. For now, it is enough to note that the 
22 Animal Procedures Committee (1993).
23 Birch et al. (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
