OI ,.1O’3 2.?63.5 /26,.261 
)4J
IME criteria 4 and 5 are closely related, since analgesics normally work by 
substituting for endogenous neurotransmitters, exploiting the same mech an-
isms. For this reason, we replaced them with a single criterion that can be 
satisﬁed in two diﬀerent ways (our criterion 4).
We also replaced the vague IME criteria 6 and 7 with a more detailed set of 
cognitive and behavioural criteria (our criteria 5–8). These criteria identify 
four main types of behavioural and cognitive abilities that are likely to involve 
5. Motivational trade- oﬀs. The animal shows motivational trade- oﬀs, in 
which (for example) the disvalue of a noxious or threatening stimulus 
is weighed (traded- oﬀ) against the value of an opportunity for reward, 
leading to :exible decision- making.
6. Flexible self- protection. The animal shows :exible self- protective 
behaviour (e.g. wound- tending, guarding, grooming, rubbing) of a 
type likely to involve representing the bodily location of a noxious 
stimulus.
7. Associative learning. The animal shows forms of associative learning 
in which noxious stimuli become associated with neutral stimuli, or 
in which novel ways of avoiding noxious stimuli are learned through 
reinforcement. These forms of associative learning go beyond classical 
conditioning in which a single conditioned stimulus overlaps temporally 
with an unconditioned stimulus.
Note: forms of associative learning that are linked, at least tenta-
tively, to sentience in humans (such as instrumental learning, 
reversal learning, and trace conditioning) provide stronger evi-
dence than other forms.
8. Analgesia preference. The animal shows that it values a putative 
analgesic or anaesthetic when injured in one or more of the following 
ways:
a. The animal learns to self- administer putative analgesics or anaes-
thetics when injured.
b. The animal learns to prefer, when injured, a location at which anal-
gesics or anaesthetics can be accessed.
c. The animal prioritizes obtaining these compounds over other needs 
(such as food) when injured.
The wording is that of Crump et al. (2022a), with the amended wording 
for criterion 7 proposed in Crump et al. (2022b).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
