8 
A WA() A(ON, -./ /0,/
1.1 The Unmarked Border
A sentient being has ethically signiﬁcant experiences. They have a subjective 
point of view on the world and on their own body.1 If I throw a ball across a 
ﬁeld, there are physical facts about the ball’s trajectory as it sails through the 
air, but there is nothing it feels like from the ball’s point of view. The ball feels 
no joy or pain; it doesn’t experience the rush of the air or the colour of the 
sky. The ball is a blank, as far as subjective experience is concerned. Now 
imagine a child chasing the ball. There will again be facts about the physical 
processes at work as the child sprints across the grass. But this time, there will 
also be something it feels like from the child’s point of view. There will be 
experiences of odour, sound, colour, bodily sensations, positive or negative 
emotions.
The capacity to have subjective experiences does not imply any level of 
reﬂective or rational ability. It does not imply an ability to reﬂect on one’s 
experiences, or to judge oneself to be having them, or to understand that 
 others also have them. It is simply a matter of having experiences. (These 
ideas are developed further in Chapter 2.)
This idea of a ‘subjective point of view’ is easiest to grasp in the case of 
vision. Ernst Mach, in the Analysis of Sensations, famously attempted to draw 
his own visual point of view (Fig. 1.1). But there is far more to human sub-
ject ive experience than vision. Our subjective point of view includes sounds, 
odours, tastes, tactile experiences: a rich sensory world. And these sensory 
experiences of a world outside us are integrated with experiences of a world 
within: bodily feelings, emotions, conscious thoughts, conscious memories, 
and imagination. When I talk of a subjective point of view, I mean it in this 
broad sense.
This subjective point of view can be contrasted with a great mass of brain 
processing that occurs unconsciously, without surfacing in experience. In 
humans, this mass includes the early stages of sensory processing, as well as 
many processes of bodily self- regulation and motor control. I don’t feel the 
registration on my retina of light too dim to perceive consciously. I don’t feel 
the release of hormones from my pituitary gland. I don’t feel the micro- 
adjustments of my muscles as I walk. As I grasp a cup, I don’t feel my grip 
strength altering very slightly from one moment to the next, ﬁnely tuned to 
1 Here I introduce a convention I will use throughout the book: the use of ‘they’ rather than ‘it’ to 
describe a sentient being.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
