;OJ-5G (A1. ./) (J1O;41 0-1.-54.-O5 
%KP
on the side of caution even if we had reason to believe the risk of mis diag-
nosis was low.
I propose we generalize this approach beyond pain management. 
ID propose that a patient who is displaying sleep- wake cycles should never 
be assumed incapable of experience when an important clinical decision is 
made. All clinical decisions should consider the patient’s best interests as 
comprehensively as possible, working on the assumption that there is a 
realistic possibility that the patient has continuing valenced experiences 
and a continuing interest in avoiding su!ering and in achieving a state 
ofDwell- being.
This proposal is well aligned with the direction in which clinical best prac-
tice is already heading. In the UK, formal diagnosis of the patient as PVS, 
MCS−, or MCS+ is still required, with detailed guidelines for diagnosis. 
Yet,Dwhen it comes to setting out practical norms of care, a reluctance to put 
any weight whatsoever on this diagnosis— in an area where misdiagnosis is 
thought to be stubbornly around 40 per cent— is evident and, moreover, 
completely understandable. In the annexes describing detailed clinical guide-
lines for managing practical problems, the PVS/MCS+/MCS− terminology 
does not appear at all. The broader diagnostic category of ‘prolonged dis-
order of consciousness’ is all that is needed to refer a patient to the relevant 
specialists. Appropriate care then depends on the patient’s individual cap abil-
ities, needs, and interests, not on their diagnostic category in the PVS/MCS+/
MCS− taxonomy.
Given all this, I propose that we should aim to phase out the PVS/MCS+/
MCS− categories, at least in therapeutic and legal contexts. I do not rule out a 
role in prognosis: these categories are of some use for predicting levels of 
recovery, though I suspect that even in this context we will eventually replace 
them with 8ner- grained, more predictively powerful categories. There are, of 
course, di!erences in how we ought to treat individual patients, depending 
on their individual capacities. Attempts at rehabilitation must start where the 
patient is and work from there. But we must not confuse this with the idea 
that coarse- grained taxonomy of MCS+, MCS−, and PVS— with its stark 
implication that patients in the PVS are not even minimally conscious— is a 
useful one in therapeutic or legal contexts.2G
2G Braddock (2017, 2021) has made a complementary proposal about the precautionary attribu-
tion of personhood. I am inclined to agree, but my topic here is sentience.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
