B0CO 2( 2HE E6-E 
%M%
case does not merit that kind of discussion. In those cases where an activity 
could not be defended from within any of the well- developed ethical perspec-
tives in the zone of reasonable disagreement, I will call it an ‘indefensible 
activity’.
This leads me to my ﬁrst proposed framework principle:
Framework Principle 1. A duty to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering. We 
ought, at minimum, to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering to sentient 
beings either intentionally or through recklessness/negligence. Suﬀering is 
not gra tuit ous if it occurs in the course of a defensible activity despite 
proportionate attempts to prevent it. Suﬀering is gratuitous if the activity is 
indefensible or the precautions taken fall short of what is proportionate.
This is a principle all reasonable people can endorse for good reasons internal 
to their own viewpoints, and it is therefore one that should command our 
collective conﬁdence and that can provide a shared basis for debate about 
more concrete policies. The ‘at minimum’ allows that many people undoubt-
edly feel, as a matter of personal morality, that they ought to go beyond the 
consensus.
6.5 Back to the Edge
Now let consider the question of how this duty applies when there is no agree-
ment about whether or not a being is sentient. Here is something we should 
deﬁnitely not say: ‘If you do not personally believe the being aﬀected by your 
action is sentient, then the duty does not apply to you. The duty applies only 
if you personally believe the being to be sentient. So, those who deny sen-
tience to crabs (for example) can boil them alive, whereas those of us who 
attribute sentience to crabs cannot.’ That is manifestly the wrong way to han-
dle uncertainty. Respect for diﬀerences of opinion matters, but uncritical def-
erence to personal belief cannot be the way forward. Let us see if we can 
improve on it.
What I propose is the following: whenever a being is a sentience candidate, 
there is a realistic possibility that our actions can cause it suﬀering, and so we 
ought to take that possibility seriously as part of our wider duty to avoid caus-
ing gratuitous suﬀering. To fail to see a realistic possibility of suﬀering due to 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
