B6 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
but I do not myself ﬁnd this an apt name for a view that posits multiple real 
cognitive kinds, all with a genuine but partial claim to being the referent of 
‘phe nomenal consciousness’.23
Another ‘many kinds’ view, albeit one that posits only two kinds, has been 
set out by neuroscientists Stanislas Dehaene, Sid Kouider, and Hakwan Lau. 
They distinguish the ‘selection of information for global broadcasting, thus 
making it 5exibly available for computation and report’ from ‘the self- 
monitoring of those computations, leading to a subjective sense of certainty 
or error’.24 They label the ﬁrst kind C1, and the second capacity C2. They 
argue that the word ‘consciousness’ con5ates C1 and C2. It is fair to surmise 
they intend this not as a conceptual analysis of the ordinary word ‘conscious-
ness’ but as an empirical analysis of the cognitive kinds in fact picked out by 
the concept. While they recognize that some may insist that the word refers to 
neither of these cognitive kinds, but rather to some third, more mysterious 
kind, they conclude that ‘the empirical evidence is compatible with the pos-
sibility that consciousness arises from nothing more than [these] speciﬁc 
computations’.2H
On a ‘many kinds’ view, many of the arguments between proponents of 
di!erent scientiﬁc theories of consciousness are misguided. Theorists from 
di!erent camps should instead recognize that they are studying genuine 
neuro bio logic al/cognitive kinds that all attract the reference of the word ‘con-
sciousness’ partially. We are in a situation akin to the following: for years, the 
residents of a town have been debating ‘what it’s like around here’ but have 
been unable to agree on what property they are talking about. In the hope of 
resolving the matter, many residents have developed theories of ‘what it’s like 
around here’. All of those theories capture something genuinely in the vicinity 
of where they were pointing. One person has come up with a theory of the 
local economy, another has a theory of the local architecture, a third has a 
theory of local governance structures. But instead of accepting that they have 
all built useful theories of di!erent properties, all of which have a non- 
exclusive claim to having captured some element of ‘what it’s like around 
here’, they instead ﬁght bitterly over which theory truly captures the essence 
of ‘what it’s like around here’. Implicitly, they must believe there is a special 
type of property— the what- it’s- likeness of a town— that transcends the purely 
structural and functional properties their theories elucidate. Explicitly, they 
23 David Papineau (2002, ch. 7) has defended a similar view, one on which various di!erent cogni-
tive properties and their lower- level neuronal realizers are all equally eligible candidates for the refer-
ence of ‘phenomenal consciousness’.
24 Dehaene et al. (2017, p. 489).
2H Dehaene et al. (2017, p. 492).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
