./) (2O:+); O3 0-AG5O1.-4 654)2.A-5.Y 
%7?
Here is something that might lessen the stigma if it were more widely 
known: according to anaesthesiologist Emery Brown and collaborators, any-
one who has been under general anaesthesia has probably passed through 
transient states functionally similar to the vegetative and minimally conscious 
states during the process of emerging back to full consciousness.4 This hap-
pens to hundreds of thousands of people every day, all over the world. It is 
just that, in a healthy brain emerging from routine anaesthesia, these states 
last a matter of minutes rather than years, and progression back to a normal 
conscious state is highly reliable. A prolonged disorder of consciousness can 
be analogized to a great slowing down of that process. Sometimes, sadly, it 
slows to the point of pausing inde8nitely along the way.
I think the comparison pushes our intuitions in the right direction. A per-
son who is under, or emerging from, general anaesthesia is no less human, or 
any less of a person, or any less a bearer of dignity and rights. The same is true 
of a person with a prolonged disorder of consciousness. They are a person in 
a poorly understood and exceptionally vulnerable condition, but this is no 
reason to think they have lost their personhood, dignity, or rights.
But let us now return to the challenges of diagnosis. Suppose I asked you to 
judge whether a patient was in the VS, the MCS−, or the MCS+ by the above 
descriptions. Imagine yourself trying to divine the signs of incipient volun-
tary action. You would 8nd yourself asking questions such as: when is a bod-
ily movement apparently purposeless? When is 8xation on an object sustained 
rather than 7eeting? How well targeted does an action need to be to count as 
targeted? How do we tell if a patient is responding to commands rather than 
coincidentally displaying a spontaneous behaviour aAer a command?
To put it bluntly, to attempt such a diagnosis is to walk into a labyrinth of 
uncertainty, with risks of false negatives and false positives at every turn, the 
path strewn with ambiguous grey- area cases, and ample scope for bias. There 
are standardized assessment procedures (such as the JFK Coma Recovery 
Scale- Revised)B that are designed to help clinicians apply these diagnostic 
categories, but it would be wrong to suppose that standardization successfully 
manages the risks of bias and error. When initial diagnoses are compared 
against more careful diagnoses by specialists, the rate of misdiagnosis has 
been found to be in the region of 40 per cent.C
Yet this is just the beginning— the 8rst layer of diagnostic uncertainty. Even 
if the behavioural criteria were applied rigorously and reliably in all cases by 
4 E.DN.DBrown et al. (2010).
B Giacino et al. (2004).
C Schnakers et al. (2009); Wang et al. (2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
