3(D 
LA,-. LA/-0A-. 123.L4 A/3 56. -A17/- 8,29L.1
He made the prediction that ‘at the end of the century the use of words and 
general educated opinion will have altered so much that one will be able to 
speak of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted’.E
Turing’s paper has a pragmatic orientation that is o:en missed. As I read it, 
Turing was not primarily concerned with the question of whether we would 
be justiﬁed in ascribing thought to future computers, regarding this question 
as unimportant. Rather, his central claim was an empirical prediction: people 
just will ascribe thought to computers when they perform at human levels in 
this type of test. Those who continue to feel qualms about these ascriptions, 
suspecting them to be unwarranted, will gradually be washed away by the tide 
of history.
Turing’s test, though, concerns ascriptions of thought, rather than ascrip-
tions of sentience or consciousness. A diﬀerent type of test will be needed for 
sentience. Schneider and Turner’s proposal adapts Turing’s approach to the 
case of phenomenal consciousness, one important ingredient of sentience in 
the way I have been using that term.
Schneider and Turner’s core assumption is that some ideas are much easier 
for a conscious being to grasp, compared with a non- conscious being of simi-
lar intelligence. In particular, the conscious being, by virtue of being !rst- 
personally acquainted with its own conscious experiences, will be able to 
easily grasp the idea of a dissociation between the mental and the physical. It 
will be able to conceive of an a:erlife, ghosts, zombies, body swaps, reincar-
nation, out- of- body experiences, inverted qualia, and so on. A second 
assumption is that there are certain types of goals that conscious beings are 
more likely to pursue. Conscious beings are able to seek new types of con-
scious experience for their own sake, a tendency Nicholas Humphrey has 
called ‘qualiaphilia’, and humans plausibly manifest this tendency in many 
aspects of their behaviour (from holidays to art galleries to drug use).F Given 
this background, the test we need, Schneider and Turner suggest, is one that 
probes, through systematic questioning, the ability of the AI system to grasp 
dissociations between the mental and the physical and its tendency to pursue 
novel experiences for their own sake, relative to a human baseline.
Now, on the face of it, the gaming problem bites this proposal just as 
strongly as it bites more naïve approaches. An LLM, for example, may have a 
huge amount of text on mental- physical dissociations in its training data. 
It  may have access to everything ever written about zombies, ghosts, 
E Turing (1950, p. 442).
F Humphrey (2022).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
