()N+(,)-+ .N/ -N()N+(,)-+ .00E(%J 
4K
focus on vision, where the science is most mature. Voluntary report is gener-
ally held up as the ‘gold standard’ of evidence: other putative indicators of 
consciousness are typically expected to prove their mettle through calibration 
against verbal report. Yet it is a gold standard that leaves us with no watertight 
way of establishing the absence of conscious perception of a stimulus, because 
alternative explanations based on conservative response criteria are im pos-
sible to rule out even in what initially seem (as with blindsight) to be clear- cut 
cases. Even when we are convinced that a stimulus has been processed uncon-
sciously, there are likely to be diﬀerences at every stage between this pathway 
and a consciousness- involving pathway, with no uncontroversial way to pin 
down which parts of the pathway are responsible for consciousness.
The underdetermination of theory by data is a problem in all sciences, but 
there is no reason to think all research programmes are equally aﬀected, and 
consciousness science has an unusually severe case.
5.4 Conscious and Unconscious Aﬀect?
With all this in mind, let us now turn from vision to aﬀect— where things get 
harder. In the case of vision, we have various strategies for dissociating uncon-
scious and conscious pathways (such as studying people with blindsight or 
presenting subliminal stimuli to healthy subjects) and these strategies hold 
some promise, despite continuing controversy. In the case of aﬀect, methodo-
logical strategies for separating the unconscious from the conscious are much 
less mature.
It is easy to trip up over terminology here, because the idea of ‘unconscious 
aﬀect’ or ‘unconscious valence’ may sound like a contradiction in terms. 
True enough, if we use ‘valence’ to refer to a hedonic quality of a conscious 
ex peri ence, then valence is conscious by deﬁnition. Yet we cannot make the 
substance of the problem go away simply by deﬁning valence in this way. The 
core issue is that many animals, including humans, may well have mechanisms 
that, like the blindsight pathway on the orthodox interpretation, are non- 
conscious functional analogues of a conscious pathway, ﬂowing from a stimulus 
to a ﬂexible, adaptive behavioural response (such as avoiding or approaching 
the stimulus) without any role at all for conscious experience.
For comparison, think of reﬂexes, such as withdrawing your hand from a 
hot stove: in these cases, the pathways never even reach the brain. Accordingly, 
the animal pain literature contains a great deal of work that attempts to disen-
tangle reﬂex pathways from those that do involve the brain (some of this is 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
