16
Large Language Models and the  
Gaming Problem
16.1 The Gaming Problem: When the System  
Knows the Criteria
In the last chapter, I emphasized that the !rst arti!cial sentience candidates 
will not necessarily impress us with their intelligence. Sentience does not 
require or imply any particular level of intelligence. Yet intelligence and sen-
tience are methodologically linked, as we see in the case of other animals. 
Intelligence can make sentience easier to detect, because an intelligent animal 
has more ways in which it can manifest its sentience to observers. The AI 
case, however, shows us that intelligence of certain kinds can also make it 
more diﬃcult to assess the likelihood of sentience. For the more intelligent a 
system is, the more likely it will be able to game our criteria.1
What is it to ‘game’ a set of criteria? When we construct lists of criteria or 
markers for sentience, we have no reason to suppose that they are even jointly 
suﬃcient for sentience, or that they capture the whole functional pro!le of 
sentience. Much more likely is that our current lists of markers include a 
small sample from a much larger cluster of functional properties, along with 
some errors (i.e. some properties that are not really markers at all).2 Many 
properties in this larger cluster are currently unknown, and there will probably 
be some of which we have not even conceived. We are trying to detect sen-
tience through a small, partial set of its eﬀects. In such a situation, there is a 
risk of a system gaming the criteria in the sense that it may reproduce the 
speci!c small sample of eﬀects we happen to have proposed as markers, 
because they are regarded as markers, without possessing the underlying 
capacity they are intended to be markers of.
Consider an analogy. I once managed the !nances of a small charity, and 
I tried to !nd ways of divesting the charity from fossil fuels. I learned that 
1 This section draws on my contributions to Andrews and Birch (2023).
2 Shea and Bayne (2010); Shea (2011).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
