%7E 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
highly trained specialists, we would still face a second layer of uncertainty: 
how well are these behavioural criteria actually tracking facts about sentience? 
Is it not at least conceivable that some patients could be experiencing a lot 
more than they are able to express behaviourally? There is now substantial 
evidence that such a situation is more than conceivable: it actually happens 
alarmingly frequently.
9.2 The Search for Cognitive-Motor Dissociation
Kate Bainbridge’s story, though bleak in some ways, also gives us grounds for 
hope. Her impressive cognitive recovery, over the course of years of rehabili-
tation, helped to show the medical community the importance of not ‘writing 
o! ’ the prospects of patients who have prolonged disorders of consciousness 
lasting several months.F The case was also signi8cant in another way: it was 
one of the earliest cases in which a neuroimaging technique— positron emis-
sion tomography (PET)—provided relevant evidence, in this case suggesting 
a covert ability to respond to faces.G The case kick- started a research pro-
gramme that aims to identify more cases in which an outwardly unresponsive 
patient is in fact a conscious, experiencing subject, unable to produce any 
behavioural report of their experiences.
The clinical name for this condition is ‘cognitive- motor dissociation’ 
(CMD). Informally, it is oAen described as ‘covert consciousness’.H Many 
researchers are now engaged in the project of developing new neuroimaging 
methods to detect it. Two promising approaches, alongside PET, involve 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalogram 
(EEG) recordings of brain activity.1I The guiding thought behind all these 
methods is that, even when a patient cannot respond behaviourally to stimu-
lation, their patterns of brain activity might still respond in a way that con-
tains clues as to the presence or absence of experience.
There are many techniques in development of this general type, all (it is 
fair to say) at an early stage. At the time of writing, none has yet been rolled 
out to widespread clinical use. The technology is moving fast, however, and 
the European Academy of Neurology already recommends the use of PET, 
F MacNiven et al. (2003); Wilson and Gracey (2001).
G Cyranoski (2012); Menon et al. (1998).
H Edlow et al. (2021); Fins and Bernat (2018).
1I Bai et al. (2021) review 119 recent studies using EEG techniques. Studies using MRI/fMRI tech-
niques are less common, but there have still been tens of such studies (Snider and Edlow 2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
