66 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
raises the possibility of dissociations between agency and embodiment. 
Future AI may have agency without any physical embodiment at all. In some 
cases, there may be robotic forms of embodiment but no biological embodi-
ment (the importance, or not, of biological embodiment will be considered in 
the next section).
In saying that this debate cross- cuts the traditional debate between ma ter-
ialism and its rivals, I mean that it is possible to mix and match positions. A 
materialist may think that conscious experience is constituted entirely by 
brain mechanisms (as seems to be implied by the most popular neuro bio-
logic al theories of consciousness) or may think the mechanisms loop out into 
other parts of the nervous system, body, and surrounding world (a view I 
associate mainly with Susan Hurley, discussed in a moment). A dualist may 
think the stu! of mind fuses only with neurons, or may think that it pervades 
the whole body of a conscious being (a view that can be found in the 
Bhagavad- gita, 2.17, and in Descartes’s theory of ‘animal spirits’).4L A pan-
psych ist, meanwhile, may think a brain in isolation could achieve ‘combina-
tion’ or may think only a whole animal can do so.
Why think agency and/or embodiment might be necessary for experience? 
The strongest argument I have seen for this idea is in Susan Hurley’s 
Consciousness in Action (1998). The starting assumption is that a conscious 
subject, to be conscious at all, must have a coherent, uniﬁed perspective on the 
world and on its own body (think back to Ernst Mach’s drawing of his visual 
perspective in Chapter 1). Hurley then argues that the required unity relies 
on intentional agency and motor processes. My uniﬁed conscious perspective 
consists of all the content available right now, to me qua agent, for the forma-
tion of intentions.4O
It would be too much of a detour to analyse the argument in detail. It is 
enough to note that it is inconclusive for a simple reason: the assumption that 
a conscious subject must have a uniﬁed conscious perspective to be conscious 
at all can be contested. We cannot rule out highly fragmentary, disuniﬁed 
forms of consciousness. We ﬁnd these forms hard to imagine, from our cur-
rent, highly uniﬁed vantage point; but we ﬁnd any alien form of conscious-
ness hard to imagine (even a bat echolocating), and so our diﬃculty 
imagining disunity is not a strong reason to doubt its possibility.
This idea has long been a point of contention in discussions of ‘split- brain’ 
cases, where a patient shows characteristic kinds of behavioural disunity a4er 
4L Blum (2019).
4O The picture is concisely reconstructed by Ward (2016).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
