4­ ,/0B ­1 0E4(/E46EC 
78D
worry? This creates a legitimate default bias against sentience if there is no 
evidence to the contrary.
Moreover, we should take due account of what is missing from present- day 
organoids. Current neural organoids are typically clusters of cortical neuro ns, 
without connections to a functioning brainstem. On Merker’s theory, mech-
an isms at the top of the brainstem, in the midbrain, are constitutively 
involved in conscious experience. Advocates of these theories should be 
sceptical of the idea of sentience in a neural organoid composed only of cor-
tical tissue. The situation is diﬀerent when an organoid is implanted into the 
brain of a host animal (typically a mouse or rat) to create a chimera. These 
chimeras are clearly sentient, but that is because the host animal is sentient, 
and the hard question becomes one of how the new tissue alters its cognitive 
capacities and welfare needs.E But in the case of a cortical organoid that is not 
implanted into a host, midbrain- centric theories give no grounds for attribut-
ing sentience.
Here there is an interesting inversion of debates about non- mammalian 
animals (Chapters 12–14). In the animal case, there is a certain familiar 
 pattern: those who suspect subcortical mechanisms are the basis of conscious-
ness take the possibility of sentience very seriously in a wide range of cases, 
whereas those who think only neocortical mechanisms are constitutively 
involved are ofen inclined to play down the risk. Current cortical organoids 
present us with the opposite situation. They generally lack the subcortical 
mechanisms taken to be so important by Merker, Panksepp, Solms, Feinberg 
and Mallatt, and others. Yet they do have cortical tissue that resembles the 
neocortical tissue of a developing human brain. So now it is a diﬀerent family 
of theories— neocortex- centric theories— that recommend taking the risk of 
sentience more seriously.
Even defenders of neocortex- centric theories, however, will normally grant 
a crucial role to the brainstem in supporting conscious experience in humans. 
The idea is typically that brainstem mechanisms, and in particular the reticu-
lar activating system, are akin to a power cable for conscious experience, 
switching it on without being part of its constitutive basis, just as your com-
puter’s power cable makes it possible to run a sofware programme without 
itself running that programme. Current organoids lack this power cable and 
accordingly display no sleep- wake cycles, to the best of my knowledge at the 
time of writing (admittedly, the situation is changing fast).
E Birch and Browning (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
