1)CE,20.)24, .)C()C513.VE)E33, 0)6 6.33E)313 
%%7
There is a temptation to retort: but when does science ever settle anything 
conclusively? The next swan could be black, the next emerald blue, and so 
on: any conclusion from inductive evidence is always potentially subject to 
refutation. Hardly surprising that the same is true of sentience. But while it is 
true enough that science never achieves absolute certainty (outside of math-
em at ics and logic, at any rate), this misses an important diﬀerence between 
absolute certainty and the conclusive settling of a question. Science does 
sometimes settle questions conclusively, not in the sense of delivering abso-
lute certainty, but in the sense of delivering a secure scientiﬁc consensus that 
makes continued disagreement and denial unreasonable.
For example, it has been conclusively established that DNA has a double- helix 
structure and that it is composed of the nucleotide bases guanine, cytosine, 
adenine, and thymine. It would be unreasonable to deny this, or to say we need to 
look for more evidence— maybe it is a single helix, maybe there are six or seven 
bases— or to suggest that public policy, to be properly impartial, should take no 
stand on the structure of DNA. These issues were live in the 1950s but have 
now been conclusively settled. A reasonable person, respectful of the epistemic 
standing of science, needs to accept the secure scientiﬁc consensus on this.
The same can be said of more controversial examples, such as the reality of 
climate change, the harmfulness of tobacco, and the medical e8cacy (in gen-
eral, allowing for disagreement about speciﬁc cases) of vaccines, antibiotics, 
and sanitation. When someone denies these points of secure scientiﬁc con-
sensus, a legitimate state is not required to suspend judgement, take both 
sides seriously, and treat the scientiﬁc consensus and the anti- scientiﬁc claims 
as equally credible. That this sometimes happens is a pathology of liberal 
democracy, not a sign of a system working well.
The edge of sentience is not like the double helix, much as we might like it 
to be. There is no secure scientiﬁc consensus about the neural basis or func-
tions of sentience. It is clearly reasonable to debate these issues. Dissent from 
majority views is o!en reasonable. That is the diﬀerence in practice between 
an issue that has been settled conclusively and one that has not. ‘Conclusive 
settledness’ is a social- epistemological property that many scientiﬁc claims 
possess but attributions of sentience in edge cases do not. Accordingly, as I 
have already mentioned, I oppose the idea of calling sceptics about attribu-
tions of sentience ‘sentience deniers’, as though their actions were comparable 
to climate change denial. Open debate on these issues is important.
Sometimes there are questions on which no secure scientiﬁc consensus has 
yet been achieved, but where the right response is to invest in more research 
to build that consensus, rather than to make controversial policy choices now 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
