286 
()ON,-.)/ O( 0)O0O),-ON12-,3
Carruthers’s ‘ﬁxed point’ is not ﬁxed for me. For me, the ﬁxed point is our 
duty to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering to sentient beings. Once we see the 
possibility of causing gratuitous suﬀering to octopuses, crabs, lobsters, and 
insects, we need to accept— even if it initially seems hard to accept— that 
there are ethical limits on what we can do to these animals, and we need to 
start talking about what those limits are. Those with me on this will ﬁnd some 
initial thoughts in this chapter.
The deliberative framework proposed in earlier chapters provides a way in 
which Carruthers’s conjecture about ‘ordinary folk’ can be tested. There I 
proposed that we use citizens’ panels to assess proportionality in a democratic 
and inclusive way, so that the policies at which we arrive can claim legitimacy. 
If a citizens’ panel, a4er all due deliberation, were to decide that there should 
indeed be no limit on the extent to which humans can torture octopuses (for 
example), then I would have to accept the force of that verdict for public pol-
icy (though not for my own private life).
I do not believe, however, that ‘ordinary folk’ are really on Carruthers’s side 
in this. My own conjecture is that any informed, deliberative exercise, any-
where in the world, would recognize fundamental ethical limits on the human 
treatment of animals. The rejection of animal cruelty is a basic human value. 
Yes, there are deep disagreements about what constitutes gratuitous suﬀering, 
with plenty of room for disagreement about culinary and religious practices. 
But that is not the same thing as saying there are no ethical limits on what we 
can do.
It is natural to worry, though, that we might grant this point and then be 
taken very fast very quickly. Are we heading down a slope that will require 
unimaginably radical changes to our ways of life? Do we need to give up driv-
ing, a practice that kills large numbers of insects? Do we need to stop using 
pesticides to grow crops? Do we need to let ants roam free across our kit-
chens? Proportionality is the watchword. Chapter 8 provided a pragmatic 
analysis of the concept. Proportionate measures to safeguard animal welfare 
need to be permissible- in- principle, adequate, reasonably necessary, and con-
sistent. Bans on driving and pesticides are not likely to be approved by an 
inclusive, democratic process as ‘reasonably necessary’.
But what, then, would be proportionate? What possible measures do merit 
serious consideration and debate? Is there anything we can do to protect 
potentially sentient invertebrates that does not involve severe infringements 
of human freedom? These are the right questions to ask. And I think the 
answer is that there is a lot we can do.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
