./,2C1,: 1-2 2?270./0 /2W P.C1U72 
2(E
assessing moods in non- human animals’.18 Judgement biases have also been 
found repeatedly in bees and fruit ﬂies, using a variety of diﬀerent stimuli and 
experimental setups.19 Does this show that insects, too, have emotions or 
moods? Of course, doubts are possible here, for all the reasons doubt is 
always possible. Elizabeth Paul and colleagues caution that ‘the :nding that 
even some invertebrate species show judgement biases raises questions as to 
whether the phenomenon observed in animals involves any conscious com-
ponent of aﬀect’.1; Nonetheless, judgement bias should be considered a 
probability- raiser for sentience in insects. It should lead us to take more ser-
ious ly the possibility of a central evaluation system modelling the risks and 
opportunities in the environment— the type of system Merker’s theory, in 
particular, regards as tightly linked to sentience.
Evaluative Modelling in the Central Complex
Are there neural substrates in insects that might plausibly support this kind of 
evaluative modelling? Recall that Merker’s theory ties sentience, in the verte-
brate case, to a behavioural core control system involving the midbrain and 
basal ganglia (see Chapter 5). This system simulates the moving animal in 
space, combining sensory information from multiple sense modalities with 
eﬀerence copies of motor commands and with interoceptive information 
about current bodily needs. It thereby facilitates ﬂexible action selection, 
allowing the animal to pursue those needs that currently merit priority. To 
serve this function, there also needs to be an evaluative aspect to the model: it 
is not just that the animal’s needs are represented, but they are also assigned 
relative value or disvalue. The overall system is proposed to suFce for 
valenced experience. Andrew Barron and Colin Klein have argued that the 
central complex in the insect brain performs analogous functions, construct-
ing an evaluative neural simulation of the state of the moving body in space.16 
In short, they argue that insects possess a behavioural control unit closely 
analogous to that of vertebrates.
To get from here to the conclusion that insects have a capacity for con-
scious experience, Barron and Klein need an additional background 
18 Bateson and Nettle (2015).
19 Bateson et al. (2011); Deakin et al. (2018); Procenko et al. (2023); Solvi et al. (2016); Strang and 
Muth (2023). See Chittka (2022, ch. 11) for an accessible synthesis.
1; Paul et al. (2020, p. 762).
16 Barron and Klein (2016); Klein and Barron (2016).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
