288 
()ON,-.)/ O( 0)O0O),-ON12-,3
ﬁsh aquaculture, there are far more species currently being farmed than there 
are species for which codes of good practice exist.5
Should attempts to farm new sentience candidates or investigation pri or-
ities simply be banned? With one important exception, to be explained later, 
I suspect this approach goes beyond what is proportionate to the risks. There 
is a problem of consistency, at least for anyone who thinks the farming of 
mammals and birds should be permitted as long as various welfare standards 
are met. A consistent approach is to insist on equivalent welfare standards 
to  those one thinks can make the farming of vertebrate animals ethically 
defensible.
There are relevantly analogous problems in environmental and public 
health policy. In an economic environment where innovation is incentivized, 
regulation cannot possibly keep up with every new product, every new 
chemical, every new hazard. Good regulation ensures that the burden of 
proof lies on producers to show that their products are safe, not on the regu-
lator to show them to be unsafe. Where evidence is needed to establish safety, 
the producer should pay for the research. This is a familiar concept in the 
context of drug safety, where it is expected that pharmaceutical companies 
will fund the trials that establish the safety of their products. An analogous 
principle would say: where more evidence is needed to develop codes of good 
practice for a proposed new method of farming, the company proposing that 
method should pay for the research, so that codes of good practice are devel-
oped, published and in place before the product goes on sale.
This idea is on the right lines but requires careful thought. In public health, 
regulators usually put their faith in randomized controlled trials.A When the 
issue is animal welfare rather than drug or food safety, one cannot simply 
conduct trials of the product; what is needed is careful scrutiny and ongoing 
monitoring of the process. To understand the welfare risks, those who formu-
late the guidelines need to be able to see how the animals are being reared, 
stored, slaughtered, transported, and sold.
There are huge risks to letting producers themselves scrutinize their own 
methods, particularly if we want the guidelines to reﬂect a precautionary atti-
tude. For example, I have sometimes heard people in the shellﬁsh industry 
defend controversial practices (such as eyestalk ablationB) on the grounds 
that there is no ‘proof ’ that they cause suﬀering. This embodies an anti- 
precautionary attitude, a form of status quo bias that favours practices that 
5 Franks et al. (2021).
A For criticism of the level of trust placed in such trials, see Stegenga (2018); Worrall (2007).
B Taylor et al. (2004).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
