P­00/LLE ,E2;L3(­,M 1,3.EK­,B0 
779
there are many other valuable kinds of research we can prioritize instead, so 
we should be willing to forego the beneﬁts. The key would be to ensure that 
the ban is targeted, so that lower- risk forms of organoid research are allowed 
to continue. An indiscriminate ban on all organoid research would be 
excessive and disproportionate. It would give no weight to the great promise 
of organoid research as a potential substitute for research on whole animals.
A less stringent response would be to allow research on sentience candi-
dates, but subject this research to a licensing regime modelled on that of ani-
mal research. Afer all, most animals used in research are sentience candidates 
(like insects) or sentient as a matter of consensus (like rats and mice). As a 
society, we permit this research even though it implies some level of suﬀering 
to sentient beings. Where research on a potentially sentient organoid might 
replace research on a clearly sentient animal, like a mouse or a rat, and might 
even be preferable on scientiﬁc grounds, consistency suggests we should at 
least try to weigh up the harms and beneﬁts of the two possible projects, 
rather than always favouring animal research. An indiscriminate bias in 
favour of research on whole sentient animals rather than merely potentially 
sentient organoids is unwarranted.
This line of thought led me to suggest, in an earlier piece with Heather 
Browning, that we should look to include potentially sentient organoids 
within the scope of animal experimentation legislation, such as the UK’s 
Animals (Scientiﬁc Procedures) Act 1986, commonly known as ASPA.2J This 
would certainly be more appropriate than treating potentially sentient orga-
noids as mere tissue, and also more appropriate than treating them as if they 
were whole embryos, when they are not.
Under ASPA, scientists proposing research projects with the potential to 
cause suﬀering to animals have to obtain a licence for the work. To be 
licensed, they need approval from an institutional ethical review board. The 
board needs to see that the scientists have carefully weighed harms and bene-
ﬁts and duly considered the imperative to reduce, reﬁne, and replace. In this 
context, ‘replace’ might mean the replacement of work on potentially sentient 
organoids with work on organoids that lack any brainstem structures and are 
less likely to be sentient. Researchers should be expected to make a case that 
they need to create a sentience candidate, and not just a simpler organoid 
system, to achieve the biomedical goals of the work. The ethical review board 
should consider whether those goals genuinely make the proposed research 
justiﬁable, and whether proportionate steps have been taken to mitigate the 
risks of causing suﬀering.
2J Birch and Browning (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
