27­+:73 73T)2,7T+E)6 
BA
weak and strong nuclear forces, and that is all. An interactionist says: there 
must, in addition, be some currently unknown entry point at the fundamen-
tal level of reality for irreducibly mental causation.
The interactionist’s task is to ﬁnd that elusive entry point, the point at 
which mental causation slips inside the workings of the brain. This has 
become a very unfashionable project. So unfashionable, in fact, that it is hard 
to imagine a project of that general shape receiving public funding. For crit-
ics, the view deserves its unfashionable status: if there were any fundamental 
causal powers distinctive to consciousness, we should expect over a century 
of intensive neuroscientiﬁc research to have encountered some glimmer of 
those powers, but we have not. The whole of contemporary neuroscience is 
compatible with neurons operating according to standard physical laws.3P Yet 
defenders of interactionism can reply that this argument is an ‘absence of evi-
dence’ argument, where the absence of evidence has resulted from the neglect 
and marginalization of the relevant questions, not from sustained testing of 
interactionist hypotheses.
In the late twentieth century, the Nobel laureate John Eccles, an expert on 
the synapse (the junction at which neurons meet and signal to each other), 
became convinced that there must be some role for mental causation in how 
a synapse works. He embarked on an idiosyncratic quest to ﬁnd the entry 
point.31 In a strange but undeniably creative paper, Eccles and collaborator 
Friedrich Beck set out a hypothesis on which a critical synaptic process, exo-
cytosis, was activated by quantum tunnelling. Mental causation, they 
hy pothe sized, is able to nudge the quantum probabilities one way or another 
by tiny increments.32
We can be conﬁdent that this particular interactionist hypothesis is false, 
because it implies a prediction (the probability of exocytosis should be 
in sensi tive to temperature) that has been experimentally falsiﬁed.33 But it 
would be hasty to write o! a general type of picture of the mind- body rela-
tionship simply because one version of it is false. Moreover, it is surely a posi-
tive feature of interactionism that speciﬁc versions of it can be tested. Once 
falsiﬁed, inter action ist hypotheses have a tendency to look ridiculous because 
of their inherent boldness— Descartes’s pineal gland hypothesis is an early 
example of this— but it is no virtue when a theory evades falsiﬁcation by fail-
ing to make any bold predictions at all.
3P Dennett (1991); Papineau (2002, app.).
31 Popper and Eccles (1977); Eccles (1989, 1994).
32 Beck and Eccles (1992).
33 Georgiev and Glazebrook (2014).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
