KA 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
These are de!nitions- by- example, and I think it is natural to worry (as 
with attempts to de!ne phenomenal consciousness by example) that they 
might fail to pin down a unique property. Deeper accounts of valence and 
arousal would be preferable, but there is no consensus on the correct 
accounts. In the case of valence, three credible options currently share the 
stage. To explain how they diﬀer, let us think about an everyday example: the 
pleasure of eating food. It feels good to eat the food, but what does this ‘feel-
ing good’ consist in?
One view is that feels good and feels bad are immediate hedonic qualities of 
the experience, ‘raw feels’. As you eat the food, your experience has an imme-
diate, positive hedonic quality. This view meshes particularly well with 
hedonic theories of well- being (such as that of Jeremy Bentham), which cast 
well- being as a function of the intensity and duration of pleasures and pains.18 
A second view, defended by Peter Carruthers, is that valence is the non- 
conceptual representation of value.19 As you eat the food, your experience 
represents it as good for you— as having positive value to you. It does this not 
using concepts, but in a non- conceptual mode, and the experience is posi-
tively valenced in virtue of having this evaluative content. A third view, 
defended by Colin Klein, Manolo Martinex, Luca Barlassina, and Max Khan 
Hayward, is that valence is a kind of imperative content.20 As you eat the food, 
your experience presents an imperative or command— roughly, get more of 
this!, where this refers to the experience itself. The experience is said to be 
positively valenced in virtue of this imperative content. A negatively valenced 
experience, by contrast, contains a command along the lines of get less of this!
Does this three- way disagreement matter for our purposes? Since all three 
views agree about the existence of valence as a real and general feature of 
aﬀective experience, none provides a reason to contest my proposed de! n-
ition of sentience. A serious challenge would come from a view that doubts 
the existence or pervasiveness of valence (clearly, if valence does not exist at 
all, or is not a general feature of aﬀect, then it would be a misstep to de!ne 
sentience in terms of it), but none of the above views lends support to such 
doubts.
It is worth noting, though, that the accounts diﬀer in their attitude towards 
the idea of unconscious valence. On the hedonic quality account, the idea of 
unconscious valence makes no sense: when we talk about the valence of an 
18 Bentham (1789/1879); Crisp (2021).
19 Carruthers (2018, 2023).
20 Barlassina and Hayward (2019); Klein (2015); Martínez and Klein (2016); Martínez (2011, 
2015).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
