2(TA1 B(.T,(.)( A.C 3-D(.’B /,GHTB: B(5A/AT,.G9TH( ,BBU(B 
67K
sentience does feature as one of the ﬁve constituent ingredients of person-
hood (along with reasoning, self- motivated activity, communicative capacity, 
and self- awareness), no single ingredient is considered strictly necessary. One 
must possess enough of the ingredients, and ‘enough’ is an unavoidably vague 
threshold.15
There is a separate (and in some ways more radical) line of argument 
according to which, even granting the personhood and right to life of the 
fetus, abortion rights can still be justiﬁed, because there is a strong right to 
bodily autonomy that place limits on what morality can demand from one 
person to sustain the life of another. Judith Jarvis Thomson oﬀered a thought 
experiment in which you are hooked up in your sleep, without your consent, 
to another adult— clearly sentient, clearly a person— who will die unless they 
remain physiologically connected to you for nine months. To maintain them, 
using the resources of your own body, would be a costly sacriﬁce on your 
part. Thomson asks: would it be morally permissible to disconnect yourself 
and let the adult die?16
Granted, the other person has a right to life, but this is a right not to be 
deprived of life without suﬃcient reason. It is generally recognized there can 
be suJcient reasons, such as self- defence. And you have a powerful reason 
deriving from bodily autonomy: you have not consented to the demands this 
person is placing on your body. An altruistic sacriﬁce might be morally 
ad mir able (‘a great kindness’, says Thomson) but it is not required, so it is 
permissible to disconnect yourself, Thomson suggests. Thomson goes on to 
argue that the thought experiment is relevantly like the case of abortion, 
where, even if the fetus is a person, a woman retains the right to refuse con-
sent for that fetus to draw on her bodily resources. The analogy has proven 
controversial, unsurprisingly.1? But to the extent that the analogy survives 
scrutiny, this is a second, distinct way to argue for the independence of abor-
tion rights from questions of sentience.
How, then, should the legal time limit be set, if not on grounds of sen-
tience? One option, concomitant with Thomson’s argument, is to draw no 
line at all, and to say a woman has the right to withdraw consent to the use of 
her bodily resources at any time. China has taken this approach since the 
1970s, though is in the process of revising its policy.18 In the UK, the concept 
15 Warren (1973, 1997). See Furlan (2022) for a recent critique of Warren.
16 Thomson (1971).
1? See Boonin (2019) for a defence of Thomson- style arguments; see Greasley (2017, ch. 2) for a 
critique.
18 Ahmed (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
