11
Neural Organoids
11.1 The Promise of Organoid Research
Biomedical research urgently needs new and better alternatives to animal 
models. The trend in recent decades has been towards increasing reliance on 
a small number of model species, especially rats, mice, zebraﬁsh, and fruit 
ﬂies, and towards a troubling level of dependence on assumptions about the 
relevance of these model systems to human medical conditions.1 Many 
researchers and funding agencies have invested heavily in the idea that under-
standing the brain mechanisms of animal models will help us understand 
complex conditions such as depression, anxiety, autism, or schizophrenia in 
their human forms. But animal models are far from perfect models, leading to 
widespread reﬂection on how things could be done diﬀerently.2
The maxim to ‘replace, reduce, and reﬁne’ was coined more than ﬁfy years 
ago and is now embedded in frameworks for the regulation of animal 
research around the world. It crystallizes a point of wide agreement. We 
should aim to replace animal models with other types of model where pos-
sible, reduce the numbers of animals being used, and reﬁne experimental 
techniques to min im ize suﬀering. Yet this maxim has turned out to be com-
patible with a drastic increase over those same ﬁfy years in the total numbers 
of animals used.3 If the total number of scientists and labs soars, as it has 
done in the last ﬁfy years, then the total number of animals used is likely to 
soar as well, even if every scientist in every lab is sincerely attempting to 
replace, reduce, and reﬁne.
So, we have two disquieting trends: growing concern about the ability of 
biomedical research on animal models to deliver tangible beneﬁt, particu-
larly in relation to neurological/mental conditions, and a growing realiza- 
tion that, despite widespread endorsement of the 3Rs, invasive animal 
research is on the rise, not on the way out. These trends raise the question: 
what is the alternative? To study a complex condition like depression or 
1 Farris (2020).
2 Shemesh and Chen (2023); Taschereau- Dumouchel et al. (2022).
3 Taylor and Alvarez (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
