%MK 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
lack of acquaintance with the relevant evidence is negligent. To acknowledge 
a realistic possibility of suﬀering, yet refuse to take proportionate steps to 
manage that risk, is reckless. So, if suﬀering actually occurs as a result, it was 
gratuitous— a result of our negligence or recklessness— and we acted wrongly, 
even if we had no intention whatsoever to cause that suﬀering.
This proposal adds content to my earlier claim that the ‘sentience candi-
date’ concept can act as a useful bridge between science and policy that helps 
us reach agreement on action, despite disagreement on theory. It does this by 
leading to a su8cient condition for recklessness or negligence. If the impact 
of a decision on a sentience candidate is ignored when the decision is made, 
and the sentience candidate suﬀers as a result, the suﬀering was a product of 
recklessness or negligence (we may wish to reserve the term ‘reckless’ for 
cases where the disregard was intentional).
To return to the example of crabs: you may personally believe that crabs 
are not sentient, but, if you are responsible for slaughtering crabs, you should 
inform yourself of the scientiﬁc reasons for thinking they might be sentient 
(see Chapter 12). It would be irresponsible to ignore those reasons. Those 
reasons should, if nothing else, give you pause before boiling the crab alive. 
They should prompt you to consider precautions you might take, such as 
prior stunning, and prompt you to think about whether it would be propor-
tionate to take those precautions. If you fail or refuse to inform yourself, and/
or fail or refuse to follow any relevant guidance, and the animal suﬀers as a 
result, the suﬀering was the product of your negligence or recklessness. This 
is the basic line of thought we need to institutionalize at the level of policy 
and law.
Accordingly, the duty to take proportionate measures to manage risk arises, 
at minimum, whenever a being is a sentience candidate. And I propose this too 
can be a point of consensus. I say ‘at minimum’ to allow for the possibility 
that some (such as Jains) will hold the view that the sentience candidate con-
cept casts too small a net, and that the duty to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀer-
ing applies even more widely (e.g. that it applies to all living things, even in 
those cases in which there is no evidence for or against sentience). However, 
I see no reason to make a similar concession to people who think the duty 
applies more narrowly (e.g. only to those systems we can be certain are sen-
tient, know to be sentient, or believe to be sentient with high probability). 
Such a view is licensing negligence and recklessness, and so cannot be right, 
given that we have a duty to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering.
Recall, for example, the absurd view criticized at the end of the last chapter, 
on which the nucleated organization of the avian pallium allegedly leads to 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
