)44 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
Crucially, a symptom can be probability- raising overall even if it only raises 
the probability conditional on some speciﬁc background theory (or set of 
theories), as long as (a) we assign some non- zero probability to that back-
ground theory (or set of theories), and (b) the symptom does not lower the 
probability of sentience on any background theory. In this way, there can be 
robust agreement around the idea that particular markers raise the probabil-
ity of sentience, despite continuing disagreement about the correct back-
ground theory.
The IME criteria obviously focus on one speciﬁc aspect of sentience, 
namely pain. We decided to retain that focus in our report, while emphasiz-
ing that the concept of sentience encompasses far more than just pain. Our 
reasons for keeping the focus on pain were pragmatic ones, explained later, in 
§12.7. Even though we decided to retain a focus on pain, we still felt the list 
required clariﬁcation and revision.
12.5 Problems with the IME Criteria
We saw two main problems. First, the criteria (especially the neurobiological 
criteria) were in some respects too narrow. For example, the reference to 
opioids in criterion 4 is making an assumption about the type of neuro-
transmitters that modulate aversive experiences, and this assumption may 
not be valid for invertebrates. There are many other endogenous neuro-
transmitters that may potentially modulate aversive experiences. What 
mattered, in our view, was that the animal’s decision- making in response 
to threatened or actual noxious stimuli is modulated by neurotransmitters 
in a way consistent with the experience of pain, distress, or harm. The IME 
criteria gave too much signiﬁcance to the question of whether the relevant 
neurotransmitter is an opioid.
Second, the IME criteria were in some respects too vague and too easy to 
satisfy. This is especially true of the behavioural criteria, 6 and 7. Regarding 
criterion 6, it is problematically vague to talk of a response ‘functionally simi-
lar to the human response’. When we touch a hot stove, we withdraw our 
hand immediately, but this is just a re:ex. Even though we also experience 
pain, the pain does not cause the withdrawal of the hand: the pain is felt afer 
the hand has begun to withdraw. So, ﬁnding a similar re:ex in an animal 
would not be convincing evidence of pain. We need more reﬁned criteria in 
order to identify functions that do provide evidence of negatively valenced 
experiences. We decided that these functions must go beyond re:exes and 
must implicate valenced states in the central nervous system.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
