,-. RH.3,6B4 BF S.4.2106T1,6B4 
)4L
markers that shif probabilities.(9 We did not commit to any single theory of 
sentience. Instead, we looked across the zone of reasonable disagreement to 
ﬁnd credible theoretical groundings for behavioural, cognitive, and neural 
markers, choosing criteria that would shif probabilities for anyone willing to 
attach non- zero probability to any of several theories. This lef us with an 
intentionally inclusive yet theoretically well- motivated list of criteria, a list we 
felt could command widespread support.
Such lists are, in eﬀect, providing warning signs: signs that our actions in 
relation to this animal may create welfare risks. How many warning signs are 
enough to make animals of a given taxon sentience candidates? This is a deli-
cate judgement call, and an example of what I called in Chapter 6 a ‘mixed 
judgement’: a judgement with scientiﬁc and evaluative elements. It is about 
judging when the evidence supports a realistic possibility of sentience, and 
when the evidence base is rich enough to allow the design and assessment of 
precautions. Our list of criteria could be combined with many diﬀerent rules 
for when ‘enough’ evidence has amassed. And this issue needs to be considered 
together with another— how to generalize across species.
12.7 The Question of Generalization
There are around 750 species of cephalopod mollusc, and around 15,000 spe-
cies of decapod crustacean. Although we found over three hundred relevant 
scientiﬁc studies in total, much of the evidence concerns a small number of 
laboratory species.
One way to handle generalization is to refuse to generalize beyond these 
laboratory species: this is the approach taken by the Animal Procedures 
Committee in 1992, when they singled out Octopus vulgaris for special pro-
tections. This, however, is inconsistent with the way animal welfare policy 
treats vertebrates. Many mammalian species have never been studied in rela-
tion to sentience (a great deal of the evidence for mammals comes from the 
lab rat, Rattus norvegicus, and the rhesus macaque, Macaca mulatta) but it 
would be inaccurate to declare on that basis that their sentience is unknown, 
because there is copious relevant evidence from other mammals that can pro-
vide a basis for sound inferences.
At the opposite extreme, there is a risk of extrapolating too generously, 
when in fact the evidence allows for ﬁner discriminations. For example, to 
protect all invertebrates, including microscopic ones, on the basis of evidence 
(9 Birch (2022c); Browning and Birch (2022).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
