5MM 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
the process of reading the valence of the facial expression was unconscious.2A 
The underlying (and I think plausible) assumption here is that, if conscious 
feelings were mediating successful performance in this task, we would expect 
subjects to do better at reading the faces when instructed to attend to their 
feelings. Unfortunately, the evidence from this experiment is weak, because 
the experimenters found that only 4/19 subjects in the group instructed to 
use their feelings as a guide to the valence of the faces actually attempted to do 
so, according to a post- experiment questionnaire.2B As things stand, a demon-
strably reliable way of disentangling valenced experience from its uncon-
scious analogues continues to elude researchers.
5.5 How Important Is the Neocortex?  
Two Contrasting Pictures
Against the background of these methodological challenges, two very 
 diﬀerent pictures of the neural basis of valenced experience have arisen. One 
is a ‘two- system’ model, in which conscious feelings depend on a cortical 
pathway, while unconscious approach, avoidance, and defensive reactions 
can be activated by subcortical, entirely unconscious pathways. LeDoux has 
prom in ent ly defended such a model, and somewhat similar pictures have 
been defended by Edmund Rolls, Kent Berridge, and Piotr Winkielman.8C All 
agree that subcortical processes generate motivational states that operate 
below the level of consciousness. They posit that some form of further 
 processing in the neocortex is needed for a conscious feeling to arise. This 
allows, of course, plenty of room for disagreement about the nature of the 
further processing. But all such views can be contrasted with a very diﬀerent 
approach that ties conscious feelings to subcortical, midbrain mechanisms. 
Versions of this view have been defended by Jaak Panksepp, Bjorn Merker, 
Marks Solms, and (at times) Antonio Damasio.81
I will take LeDoux’s model as my focal example of a two- system picture 
and compare it with that of Panksepp. Both pictures have a place in the zone 
2A LeDoux and Pine (2016); LeDoux and Brown (2017).
2B Bornemann et al. (2012, p. 121).
8C Berridge and Robinson (2003); LeDoux and Pine (2016); LeDoux and Brown (2017); Rolls 
(2014); Winkielman and Berridge (2004). Lisa Feldman Barrett has some a6nities with this group in 
so far as she posits signiﬁcant cognitive involvement in emotion, but she has also criticized ‘two sys-
tem’ thinking (Barrett 2017a, p. 224).
81 Panksepp (1998a, ch. 16); Panksepp (2005); Damasio et al. (2013). Mark Solms’s (2021) book 
The Hidden Spring includes an engaging presentation of Panksepp’s ideas.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
