()E P,­./0E ­1 ­,234­/5 ,E0E3,6) 
789
autism, the argument goes, you cannot simply study tissue in culture, but 
you also cannot study human subjects at the level of mechanistic detail 
required to understand how, for example, particular alleles and patterns of 
gene expression may inﬂuence these conditions. So, you must use animals, 
where the ethical limits on what can be done are more permissive and a 
broader range of interventions is available.
This is where neural organoids have tremendous promise. The organoid is 
a relatively new kind of model system with great potential for replacing inva-
sive animal research. Organoids are models of organs constructed from 
pluripotent stem cells. Human stem cells can be used, leading to miniature 
models of human organs constructed from human tissue. Suppose, for 
ex ample, you want to understand human kidney function. One option is to 
study the renal system of a rat or mouse, relying on the idea that this will 
resemble human kidney function in the ways that matter. But organoid tech-
nology gives you a new option. You take pluripotent human stem cells and 
induce them to diﬀerentiate into kidney cells. The kidney organoid you con-
struct will still diﬀer from a normal kidney in many ways, but you have a 
degree of control over those ways, and you can be conﬁdent that the genes 
being expressed are the same as those in human kidney cells, because the 
cells are human kidney cells.
When we are talking about kidney organoids, gastrointestinal organoids, 
cardiac organoids, and other types of non- neural organoid, these develop-
ments should be celebrated. We should not try to put the brakes on a pro-
gramme that could turn out to deliver the alternative to animal research that 
has been so sorely needed for so long.
But when it is the brain being modelled, the work becomes more contro-
versial, and rightly so. A neural organoid is a model constructed from pluri-
potent stem cells induced to form organized neural tissue. Here too, it is the 
use of human stem cells to create human neural organoids that is generating 
major scientiﬁc excitement. I will use the term ‘neural organoid’ here, but I 
note that the term ‘brain organoid’ is also used, and the terms ‘cerebral orga-
noid’ and ‘cortical organoid’ are ofen used in cases where the organoid is 
intended to model the human neocortex.
There are strong ethical reasons in favour of doing this research, if it allows 
us to model neurological conditions for which scientists currently lack good 
models, and if it can substitute for invasive animal research. And yet the 
research invokes the image, if not currently the reality, of a sentient human 
brain in vitro, and this image ﬁlls many onlookers with a sense of horror. 
Even when one looks at the research as it is now, it is hard not to feel a certain 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
