)4K 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
negatively valenced aﬀective experiences: motivational trade- oﬀs, :exible 
self- protective behaviour, associative learning, and the valuing (as shown by 
self- administration, conditioned place preference or prioritization) of analgesics 
or anaesthetics when injured.
For criterion 7, the wording on which we eventually settled (afer re:ecting 
on the thirty commentaries we received, cited in §1.7) was that the learning 
must ‘go beyond classical conditioning in which a single conditioned stimu-
lus overlaps temporally with an unconditioned stimulus’. We added that 
‘forms of associative learning that are linked, at least tentatively, to sentience 
in humans (such as instrumental learning, reversal learning, and trace condi-
tioning) provide stronger evidence than other forms.’(2
It would be an exaggeration to suggest these criteria remove all room for 
interpretation. There is, for example, room for debate about what constitutes 
:exible decision- making and :exible self- protective behaviour. The kinds of 
ﬂexibility people take to be indicative of sentience may depend on their prior 
theoretical sympathies. We found it impossible to do away completely with 
such terms. What we took to be evidence of sentience was behaviour plausibly 
guided by a central evaluation system— a system representing the animal’s 
needs, evaluating the opportunities and risks posed by the environment, and 
weighing these against each other— with this evaluative representation pro-
viding the source of :exibility.
Do the decisions we made— such as the decisions to discount re:exes, 
genetically programmed behaviours, habituation, and sensitization— re:ect 
an implicit partial theory of sentience? They are not fully theory- neutral, 
despite our attempts to be as neutral as possible between currently popular 
theories. Our criteria are particularly well aligned with theories that tie sen-
tience to mechanisms for the centralized integration of information in service 
of learning and decision- making. These include Panksepp’s and Merker’s 
midbrain- centred theories,(3 the global workspace theory(( of Baars, 
Dehaene, and collaborators, the multisensory maps theory of Feinberg and 
Mallatt,(7 and the Unlimited Associative Learning (UAL) framework of 
Ginsburg and Jablonka.(8 People who assign non- zero probability to any of 
these background theories are likely to see our criteria as probability- raising.
Our choices, then, were not completely theory- free. It was more in the 
spirit of what I have called a ‘theory- light’ approach, where we seek points of 
convergence across multiple theories and use these convergences to identify 
(2 Crump et al. (2022b).
(3 Panksepp (1998); Merker (2007).
(( Mashour et al. (2020).
(7 Feinberg and Mallatt (2016).
(8 Ginsburg and Jablonka (2019); Birch et al. (2020, 2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
