M6M 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
managed in this area, but one does not have to be a utilitarian to think this. 
There are various sentientist ethical outlooks (Chapter 4).
The Warnock Committee observed that, if one does regard this as the pri-
mary consideration, then one is likely to favour a time limit later than 14 
days:
According to this argument the time limit for in vitro development, and for 
research on the embryo, could be set either when the ﬁrst beginnings of the 
central nervous system can be identiﬁed, or when functional activity ﬁrst 
occurs. If the former is chosen, this would imply a limit of 22 to 23 days afer 
fertilization, when the neural tube begins to close. As to the latter, in the 
present state of knowledge the onset of central nervous system functional 
activity could not be used to deﬁne accurately the limit to research, because 
the timing is not known; however, it is generally thought to be considerably 
later in pregnancy. With either limit, proponents suggest subtracting a few 
days in order that there would be no possibility of the embryo feeling pain.65
The strongly precautionary attitude on display in this passage— at a time 
when many surgeons doubted the possibility of pain in newborn babies— is 
striking. The committee took seriously the possibility of pain experience as 
early as 22 days, minus a few more days. They felt they could rule out any 
possibility of pain prior to the neural tube closing, thereby forming an early 
precursor to the brain and spinal cord. Afer that, pain was possible.
This is rather too precautionary, according to the framework constructed 
in Part II of this book. There I suggested that there is a scientiﬁc meta- 
consensus around the idea that a spinal cord alone does not suJce for sen-
tience. If there were no such meta- consensus, we would have to dramatically 
rethink the practice of organ donation. The wide agreement that spinal cords 
are not suJcient does not confer on it the status of absolute certainty— it is 
conceivable that future evidence will shake our currently justiﬁed conﬁdence— 
but it does confer a kind of ‘moral certainty’ that licenses regarding a brain 
dead human as legally dead.
My framework is not based on the idea that we can move from ‘cannot 
prove absence of sentience with absolute certainty’ to ‘strong precautions are 
justiﬁed’. This would be pernicious in the case of organ donation. My frame-
work replaces this crude precautionary reasoning with a more sophisticated 
version that moves from ‘can positively establish sentience candidature’ to 
65 Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology (1984, §11.20).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
