2(TUB(B AB B(.T,(.)( )A.C,CAT(B 
MN8
the emerging new picture of the subplate as a site of nascent cortical func-
tions are signiﬁcant developments that shif probabilities. But the idea that 
midbrain structures alone are suJcient for sentience in the absence of the 
cortex is one that Panksepp and Merker gave us strong reasons to take ser-
ious ly some time ago.;E These reasons fall well short of a conclusive case, but 
they establish a realistic possibility of sentience once the relevant circuits are 
active. The more traditional view that sentience in humans requires mature 
cortical circuits, and thus cannot develop before 24 weeks, is also a rea son-
able one. But we are not entitled to regard this view, or any single view, as a 
moral certainty. Even if we think it unlikely, the credibility of the Panksepp/
Merker view may render some precautions proportionate to the risk of sen-
tience developing early.
Indeed, as soon as one grants the credibility of the Panksepp/Merker pic-
ture, one needs to take seriously the idea that a fetus may be sentient as soon 
as the relevant midbrain structures, especially the superior colliculus (SC) 
and periaqueductal gray (PAG), are functional. It is very hard to pinpoint 
when in human development this threshold is crossed, but it appears to be 
well before mature cortical function is achieved. Defensive responses to nee-
dle puncture, including bradycardia (reduced heart rate), are some evidence 
that the PAG is operational by 18 weeks’ gestation, given the role it plays in 
regulating such responses.4F But the relevant brain areas may be active before 
their activity is clearly manifested. They may plausibly be functional by 
159weeks41 or even by 12 weeks, as suggested by Derbyshire and Bockmann 
and by Anna Ciaunica and colleagues.4: The development of the SC has been 
studied in some detail and found to be virtually complete by 20 weeks, with 
mature lamination visible from about 16 weeks.4;
These dates are agonizingly approximate. But, by this point in the book, 
that should come as no surprise. We have to face up to the reality that this sort 
of very approximate line- drawing may be the best we can do for the fore see-
able future. This could be because there is no precise moment at which sen-
tience comes online. It could also be because, although there is a precise 
moment (and both possibilities belong in the zone of reasonable disagree-
ment; see §3.7), our present theoretical understanding of the nature of con-
sciousness is far too immature to adjudicate between alternative hypotheses 
about where the line is.
;E Panksepp (1998a); Merker (2007). Ciaunica et al. (2021) defend a similar view.
4F Koba et al. (2016).
41 Sekulic et al. (2016).
4: Ciaunica et al. (2021).
4; Qu et al. (2006).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
