)CF 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
brain of Birgus latro calculated it to have a volume of around 3 cubic 
 millimetres.78 For comparison, the brain of a typical laboratory mouse 
(Mus musculus) is about 500 cubic millimetres.79
Yet we need to remember that a signiﬁcant number of neurons and a lot of 
functional complexity can be packed into a small brain. In decapods, there 
are well- documented integrative regions linked to learning and memory, 
known as the hemiellipsoid bodies. The study just mentioned counted 
253,556 neurons in each of the two hemiellipsoid bodies of Birgus latro, each 
representing 13.4 per cent of the brain by volume.7; I oppose the use of neuron 
counts as a major consideration, and that point still stands even when the 
neuron counts concern brain areas linked to integrative functions. Yet it is 
still worth highlighting the substantial amount of brain tissue dedicated to 
integrating information from diﬀerent sensory sources as a retort to those 
who question whether decapods even have brains.
How widely shared are these integrative regions? A study by Nicholas 
Strausfeld and collaborators provided compelling evidence on this question 
(Fig. 12.2).79 Strausfeld et al. used an immunostaining technique to identify 
and map out the hemiellipsoid bodies in thirteen distinct lineages of crustacean. 
The study demonstrates that these regions are a general feature of the decapods. 
At the same time, it also revealed miniaturization and weak diﬀerentiation of 
those regions in the world’s most commercially important farmed shrimp, 
Penaeus vannamei (also known as Litopenaeus vannamei), commonly known 
as the whiteleg shrimp or Paciﬁc white shrimp, but ofen sold as the ‘king 
prawn’.
Are these miniaturized hemiellipsoid bodies still performing important 
functions for the animal? Since nervous tissue is energetically expensive to 
maintain, this sort of diminution is what we expect to see when a particular 
system is no longer functionally signiﬁcant. Rebecca Meth and colleagues 
suggest one possible explanation: the size of the hemiellipsoid bodies is 
largely driven, they suggest, by the richness of the olfactory input they receive, 
but the sensory ecology of whiteleg shrimps in the wild gives reduced 
importance to olfaction, particularly in comparison to terrestrial decapods, 
and increased importance to vision in low- light conditions (i.e. turbid water). 
78 Krieger et al. (2010).
79 Badea et al. (2007).
7; This can be compared with the 13.7 million neurons in the cerebral cortex of a mouse 
(Herculano- Houzel et al. 2006): a big diﬀerence, but not as big as one might have guessed from the 
volumes alone.
79 Strausfeld et al. (2020). See also Harzsch and Krieger (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
