2H 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
characterization in functional terms. We are supposed to reﬂect on examples 
like echolocation and on our own experiences of colour, sound, odour, pain, 
pleasure, and so on, and the diIculty of describing them to anyone who lacks 
the relevant sensory abilities, and immediately see at least the appearance of a 
puzzle— the explanatory gap, the hard problem— and ‘phenomenal con-
sciousness’ denotes the source of that apparent puzzle.
We can construct a richer de!nition only by introducing further assump-
tions that not everyone who studies consciousness can accept. For example, 
we could add that the experiential qualities are a special type of property, dis-
tinct from any physical property of brain activity. A phenomenally conscious 
state could then be de!ned as any state that possesses these special non- 
physical properties. That would give us a substantial de!nition but clearly not 
a neutral one: it would be to embrace a controversial dualist metaphysics 
(see §3.4, for more discussion of dualism).
It is not just dualists who favour building dualistic assumptions into our 
de!nitions. Some of their opponents also do this— in order to argue that phe-
nom enal consciousness does not exist at all. Keith Frankish, in a 2016 article, 
sets up a distinction between two fundamentally diﬀerent types of property— 
qualitative and non- qualitative— in order to argue that phenomenal con-
sciousness would, by de!nition, have to involve properties of the !rst type, 
whereas in reality there are no such properties.12 The strategy of setting up 
our concepts in a dualistic way in order to then snap back hard, like a coiled 
spring, on the properties they allegedly denote, is one I !nd unhelpful. The 
aim of it seems to be to destroy common ground, when I think we need to 
cling to whatever common ground we can !nd.
Other proposals add assumptions in more subtle ways. Eric Schwitzgebel, 
in a response to Frankish, has proposed that we should de!ne phenomenal 
consciousness by example.13 We can list examples of states that clearly have it: 
dreams, conscious thoughts, conscious mental images, sensory experiences, 
bodily experiences, experiences of emotion. The concept is nearly always 
introduced by means of a list like this. When I said ‘think of experiencing 
pain, a quiet or loud noise, the colour of a blue sky or a sunset, the smell of 
coﬀee or rotten eggs’, I was giving a list of positive examples. Schwitzgebel 
suggests that there are also clear negative examples, where phenomenal con-
sciousness is absent. Many of your bodily processes operate entirely outside 
your conscious experience. There is nothing it’s like to be generating red 
12 Frankish (2016).
13 Schwitzgebel (2016).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
