)CM 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
from octopuses would be hard to defend. It would also rely on tenuous 
extrapolation from the octopus to nervous systems that are not just far 
smaller, but also very diﬀerently organized. The same concerns would arise, 
though less acutely, if we were to generalize from true crabs to all crustaceans, 
including microscopic crustaceans such as copepods. That is not to say that 
copepods are not sentient— we cannot rule out sentience in small brains. It is 
only to say that it would be tenuous to generalize from one case to the other.
An intermediate approach is to use our best current picture of the phylo-
genetic relationships between species to make inferences. In the case of the 
decapods, our best current picture divides the order Decapoda into in two 
suborders (Dendrobranchiata, Pleocyemata) with the Pleocyemata further 
subdivided into ten infraorders. This way of classifying decapods is supported 
by molecular evidence.(; Inferences from a model species to other species of 
the same infraorder are more strongly supported than inferences stretching 
across infraorders, or inferences across the Dendrobranchiata/Pleocyemata 
division. So, that is the approach we took. We reviewed all the evidence we 
could ﬁnd, noting the particular species being studied, but also making gen-
eralizations from model species to other species of the same infraorder.
Even though the cephalopod molluscs sit at a higher ‘rank’ than decapods 
in Linnaean taxonomy— they are a class rather than an order— there are con-
siderably fewer known species of cephalopod than decapod: around 750. This 
gives some sense of the arbitrariness of Linnaean ranks. Ultimately, the phylo-
genetic relationships between species are more important for underpinning 
inductive generalizations than Linnaean categories.(9 Here too, we turned to 
our best current phylogenetic picture to guide our inferences.7D We decided it 
was reasonable in this case to generalize across orders, such as the order 
Octopoda, and reasonable in some cases to make generalizations about all 
coleoid cephalopods (subclass Coleoida, including all octopuses, squid, and 
cuttleﬁsh) on the basis of evidence from a diverse subset of coleoid species.
12.8 What We Found, in Brief
Our review is freely available online and runs to over one hundred pages, 
covering over three hundred studies, so I will not repeat it here.71 I will 
instead focus on the way we aggregated evidence and communicated 
uncertainty— and on some striking examples.
(; Wolfe et al. (2019).
(9 de Queiroz (2006).
7D Tanner et al. (2017).
71 Birch et al. (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
