OBM,?TIO(4 TO ?ITIN,(4’ 1A(,24 
54O
further questioning of experts and structured deliberation, and then recon-
venes for voting. This creates a situation in which the voting is done by an 
informed and representative group in which everyone has deliberated with 
some others, even though the deliberation itself took place in smaller groups 
that may have been unrepresentative in various ways.
Suppose, though, that an important perspective, such as the e;ects of a 
proposal on a small minority, is represented by only one or two people in the 
assembly, who are then absent from the vast majority of the deliberative 
groups. The ﬁssion- fusion approach risks marginalizing such perspectives. 
There may also be cases in which an important perspective is associated with 
a minority group so small that a random sample of 1,000 people will still be 
unlikely to have even one representative of that perspective. Here there is a 
risk of an even more severe kind of marginalization.
One way to address this risk is to allow a;ected minorities to nominate 
experts (that is, experts on how the options on the table will a;ect them). In 
e;ect, we compensate for the limitations of statistical representation by 
expanding our conception of expertise. We put these viewpoints in at the 
‘expert input’ stage of the process. I am uneasy with this solution, because 
IJcan easily imagine a member of an a;ected minority fairly objecting: I’m not 
just a source of information. I need to be represented when deliberation and 
voting occur.
A way forward is to allow citizens’ panels to co- opt new members from 
particular minority groups.:: The a;ected minority initially appears at the 
expert input stage. The initial panel, recognizing that this issue really does 
a;ect this group in an unusually severe way, may decide to co- opt more mem-
bers from that minority, so that the minority is represented in every delibera-
tive group and has increased voting power. They will still be a minority, but 
the request for representation will have been answered. And it will have been 
answered through a decision by the original panel to expand its membership, 
not by a top- down ruling from the organizers.
Sometimes, the panel will need to co- opt new members who can speak for 
a minority but who are not themselves members of that minority. Think here 
of patients with disorders of consciousness. They cannot participate in a citi-
zens’ panel while incapacitated, but their relatives can, and indeed patients 
who have recovered can too. There is a strong case, at face value, for making 
:: This is inspired by (though slightly di;erent from) a suggestion from Alastair Cochrane in 
Sentientist Politics (2018). Cochrane suggests we use citizens’ panels to decide the composition of 
 panels that will decide questions concerning non- human animals.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
