69MM720 /F :(71T)2 U 
;B
One response might be to say that failures of sympathetic imagination pro-
vide only defeasible evidence of impossibility (this appears to be Michael 
Tye’s view).KP In the case of echolocation, there is a defeater: our imaginative 
powers depend on our sensory abilities. Yet, as Eric Schwitzgebel has argued, 
there is a defeater in the case of borderline consciousness too.K1 Sympathetic 
imagination is an ability that works by producing determinately conscious 
states. We have substantial control over the content of these states, but their 
determinately conscious nature is not something we can manipulate at will. 
We cannot use this ability to imagine anything that is not a determinately 
conscious state. Given this limitation, the fact that we cannot use sympathetic 
imagination to conjure up borderline cases is no evidence of their impossibil-
ity, any more than our inability to sympathetically imagine a bat echolocating 
is evidence of its impossibility.
We are not, therefore, in a position to rule out borderline cases of con-
sciousness from the armchair. As with many- kinds materialism, I would like 
deep gradualism to be false, because its consequences for ethics are troubling. 
Just as many- kinds materialism would seemingly leave many ethical ques-
tions with indeterminate answers (because it is indeterminate which of the 
kinds carries the ethical signiﬁcance of phenomenal consciousness), deep 
gradualism would lead to the problems of ethical indeterminacy regarding 
the borderline region. The problems might be a little easier to handle, espe-
cially if the borderline region is small (or if no extant organisms reside in it), 
but it is a problem nonetheless.
3.8 Summary of Chapter 3
Reasonable disagreement about sentience requires responsiveness to evi-
dence and argument. It excludes baseless recommendations, dogmatic adher-
ence to refuted theories, and morally abhorrent (e.g. sadistic) positions. 
However, the uncertainty in this area is such that many very di!erent posi-
tions can be held by reasonable people who are well versed in the relevant 
science and philosophy.
This chapter has examined sources of disagreement that have their origins 
in the philosophy of mind. The focus in this literature has been on the ‘phe-
nom enal consciousness’ aspect of sentience, not the valence aspect. 
Epiphenomenalism, the idea that consciousness leaves no causal imprint on 
KP Tye (2021).
K1 Schwitzgebel (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
