77F 
4E;,3L ­,234­/50
We should feel pressure towards consistency. When an adult human patient 
displays no sleep- wake cycles and no brainstem reﬂexes, and when this con-
dition is irreversible, they are declared brainstem dead, regardless of the 
amount of cortical tissue they still possess. Cortical tissue alone is not enough 
for sentience candidature, even for those who think the neural basis of sen-
tience lies in the neocortex.
Indeed, as I understand it, a major current limitation of current organoids 
(when not implanted into host animals) is that they are not fully vascular-
ized: they lack active blood ﬂow. Again, I must note that the situation is 
changing rapidly. As I write, labs around the world are trying hard to over-
come this limitation by joining up neural organoids to vascular organoids, 
with varying degrees of success.G We cannot rule out the possibility that fully 
vascularized organoids will be developed very soon, or even by the time this 
book is published. But as things stand at this moment, it seems a basic pre- 
requisite for any cognitive function or conscious experience in a human brain 
is absent in neural organoids.
11.3 Early Warning Signs
For all this, there are concerning signs about the potential for organoid 
research to accelerate rapidly towards the edge of sentience. In the case of 
disorders of consciousness, the search for electrophysiological markers of 
conscious experience has been underway for decades (see §9.2). Synchronized, 
rhythmic oscillations of local ﬁeld potentials— informally known as brain 
waves— have long been seen as one of the most important sources of potential 
markers. Despite a continuing lack of consensus about exactly which oscilla-
tions matter, there is widespread consensus about the idea that they are a 
promising place to look.
Trujillo and colleagues allowed cortical organoids to develop for an 
un usual ly long period of time, ten months, and recorded their electrophysio-
logical activity through weekly recordings. They charted the emergence of 
complex oscillatory waves. They found that organoids quickly settled into a 
pattern of switching ‘between long periods of quiescence and short bursts of 
spontaneous network- synchronized spiking’.H These synchronized ‘network 
events’ became stronger and more frequent over time, while the intervals 
between events became more variable.
G Matsui et al. (2021); Shirure et al. (2021); Sun et al. (2022).
H Trujillo et al. (2019, p. 562).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
