2(( 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
supporting ﬂexible decision- making.11 Matilda Gibbons and collaborators 
presented bumblebees (Bombus terrestris) with a choice of various heat pads 
of diﬀerent temperatures. Each heat pad enabled access to sugar solution, 
with varying concentrations of sugar solution available at diﬀerent pads. 
There was evidence that bees traded oﬀ the temperature of the pads against 
the sweetness of the rewards in anticipatory fashion, accepting an expectation 
of higher temperatures to access higher expected concentrations of sugar.12
Following this study, I worked with Gibbons and several other col lab or-
ators to review all the available insect evidence relevant to our eight proposed 
pain markers. We found a substantial amount of evidence spread across the 
six most intensively studied insect orders. We also found large evidence gaps: 
not enough work has seriously investigated whether insects might display 
these indicators. It is entirely possible that, as these gaps are :lled in, the case 
for pain in insects will become very strong indeed. We should also, however, 
be open to the possibility that the traditional focus on pain in discussions 
of sentience does not serve insects well. There are ways to make a case for 
a  realistic possibility of sentience in insects that do not proceed via 
 evidence of pain.
Judgement Bias
What are these other lines of evidence? One concerns judgement bias. In a 
judgement bias test, an animal is trained to associate one cue with reward and 
another with punishment and is then shown an ambiguous cue. For example, 
a green cue might be paired with reward and a blue cue with punishment, 
with experimenters then showing cues of intermediate colours between green 
and blue. The question is: are stressed animals less likely to take a risk on an 
ambiguous cue? And are animals more likely to take a risk afer receiving an 
unexpected reward? In this literature, an increased tendency to take a risk on 
the ambiguous cue is called a ‘pessimistic’ judgement bias and an increased 
tendency to do so is called an ‘optimistic’ judgement bias.
When found in mammals and birds, judgements biases are ofen taken as 
indicators of felt mood. Melissa Bateson and Daniel Nettle, two distinguished 
behavioural biologists, have even described them as a ‘gold standard for 
11 Appel and Elwood (2009).
12 Gibbons et al. (2022). I was not personally involved in this study, although Gibbons, Crump, and 
Chittka are associated with my ‘Foundations of Animal Sentience’ project.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
