27­+:73 73T)2,7T+E)6 
6N
metaphysical background picture very di!erent from the materialist 
 mainstream. As Francis Fallon and James Blackmon have remarked ‘though a 
player in the debate within neuroscience over consciousness . . . [IIT] requires 
profound revision, or at the very least reframing, of how we understand the 
nature of physical reality’.43
At ﬁrst, I saw IIT as complementing Russellian monism by providing a 
mathematical theory of the conditions in which combination occurs.44 I now 
think that was a mistake. I initially underestimated the in5uence of the ideal-
ist tradition in philosophy on IIT. Consider the paper ‘Only what exists can 
cause: an intrinsic view of free will’, written by ﬁve of IIT’s leading lights: 
Giulio Tononi, the original architect of the theory, plus Larissa Albantakis, 
Melanie Boly, Chiara Cirelli, and Christof Koch. The paper sets out the onto-
logical commitments of IIT, and the picture it paints is one in which con-
scious minds are the ontological bedrock from which the rest of reality is 
constructed. The authors write, for example, that:
Because I actually exist— as a ‘large’ intrinsic entity— the neurons of my 
complex cannot also exist. They cannot exist as constituents of my complex, 
because what actually exists is not a substrate as such but the substrate 
unfolded into a Ф- structure expressing its causal powers. And they cannot 
exist as small intrinsic entities in their own right because, if they specify a 
large intrinsic entity, they cannot also specify a set of smaller entities. 
Moreover, because my alternatives, reasons, and decisions exist within my 
experience— as sub- structures within an intrinsic entity— the neuronal sub-
strates of alternatives, reasons, and decisions cannot also exist.4H
The message is repeated: my neurons do not truly exist. They exist in a 
derived, extrinsic sense— as stable appearances that other conscious ob ser-
vers, such as neurosurgeons, can use as handles of control over my 
experiences— but they do not intrinsically exist. What intrinsically exists is 
my conscious point of view. Tononi and colleagues explicitly contrast their 
‘intrinsic powers ontology’ with what they call the ‘extrinsic substrate+ ontol-
ogy’, a view I would call orthodox metaphysical realism: a view on which 
fundamental particles are the ontological bedrock, neurons are constituted 
43 Fallon and Blackmon (2021).
44 Hedda Hassel Mørch (2019) has examined the relationship between IIT in Russellian monism 
in detail. The Orch- OR theory developed by Stuart Hamero! and Roger Penrose also contains strong 
panpsychist or panprotopsychist elements (Hamero! and Penrose, 2014).
4H Tononi et al. (2023).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
