P(OPOSA4S ABOU, SP.CI+IC CAS.S 
5
should be driven by markers of sentience, not by markers of intelligence or by 
brain size.
Proposal 17. Sentience is not pain. Although there are pragmatic  reasons 
for the focus on pain in debates about animal sentience, we must be open to 
the possibility that the class of sentient animals is bigger than the class of ani-
mals that feel pain. Other forms of evidence can make an animal a sentience 
candidate, such as evidence of sophisticated forms of learning, attention, 
working memory, and planning.
Proposal 18. Some invertebrates are sentience candidates. Coleoid 
 cephalopod molluscs, decapod crustaceans of the suborder Pleocyemata, 
and insects (all when in the adult stage) are sentience candidates. Debates 
about proportionality are warranted in cases where human activities create 
risks of suﬀering to these animals. Decapod crustaceans of the suborder 
Dendrobranchiata, insect larvae, spiders, gastropods, and nematode 
worms are investigation priorities.
Proposal 19. Codes of good practice and licensing. There should be a licensing 
scheme for companies attempting to farm sentience candidates or investiga-
tion priorities for which no welfare regulations yet exist (such as insects). 
Obtaining a license should be dependent on signing up to (and, where neces-
sary, funding research leading to) a code of good practice concerning animal 
welfare.
Proposal 20. Octopus farming. It is very unlikely that octopus farming can 
meet reasonable expectations regarding welfare and humane slaughter. It 
would be proportionate to ban octopus farming.
Proposal 21. Towards humane slaughter. When an animal is a sentience can-
didate, it is proportionate to ban slaughter methods that needlessly risk 
extending and intensifying the suﬀering associated with dying, such as boil-
ing animals alive without prior stunning.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
Proposal 22. Sentience is not intelligence (II). We should be aware of the pos-
sibility of a substantial decoupling between intelligence and sentience in the 
AI domain. Precautions to manage risks of suﬀering should be driven by 
markers of sentience, not markers of intelligence. For example, emulations of 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
