;6 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
the physical world, is a coherent possibility, but one that threatens to leave us 
unable resolve disputes at the edge of sentience using physical evidence. 
Luckily, it is empirically implausible, because consciousness bears all the hall-
marks of being an evolved adaptation.
There are three main ways to make sense of the idea that consciousness has 
a place in the causal order of the physical world: materialism, interactionist 
dualism, and Russellian monism. Materialism covers many di!erent positions 
on which conscious experience has a physical basis. A signiﬁcant faultline is 
between materialists who identify phenomenal consciousness with a single, 
uniﬁed natural kind and those who suspect it gestures indeterminately 
towards two or more kinds. Interactionist dualism and Russellian monism 
have the status of radical alternatives, but cautious formulations of these 
views can be reasonable hypotheses.
Biopsychism can be reasonable too if advanced as a speculative hypothesis, 
rather than as a claim which receives support from evidence- based accounts 
of the nature of life. The integrated information theory of consciousness, 
which in its full form involves a metaphysical background picture with elem-
ents of Leibnizian idealism, has a similar status: a reasonable hypothesis to 
put forward, provided one is prepared to acknowledge its highly speculative 
nature. In both cases, the key is not to present a speculative metaphysical pic-
ture as a claim supported by scientiﬁc evidence.
There are several further axes of philosophical disagreement that lead 
 people to disagree about the edge of sentience. One concerns the importance 
of agency and embodiment, real or virtual. Another concerns the scale of 
functional organization that matters: can small- scale (e.g. within neuron) 
functions make a di!erence to the presence or absence of sentience, or is 
large- scale functional organization (e.g. possessing a global workspace) all 
that counts?
A third concerns whether the edge of sentience is sharp or blurred: must 
there be a sharp transition between the absence of sentience and its presence 
in its most minimal forms, or can there (as with baldness, tallness, oldness) 
be borderline cases in which there is no determinate fact of the matter one 
way or the other? Both positions are reasonable, and the arguments so far 
given for each position are inconclusive.
The Edge of Sentience: Risk and Precaution in Humans, Other Animals, and AI. Jonathan Birch, Oxford University Press. 
© Jonathan Birch 2024. DOI: 10.1093/9780191966729.003.0004
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
