KH 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
lethargy. The second drug might form part of a pain- management strategy, 
alongside other drugs that aim to make the pain feel less bad, but that is prob-
ably the best that can be said for the second drug. By contrast, the !rst drug 
would be a medical revolution that would transform human lives vastly for 
the better. There would be a strong ethical imperative to prescribe it, unless 
there were terrible side eﬀects.
The thought experiment illustrates the point that ﬂipping valence can turn 
a state of great negative ethical value— a state we have a clear ethical im pera-
tive to ameliorate, at least when we can do so very easily and at little cost— 
into a state that has at least some positive ethical value (even if we think 
intense pleasures should be enjoyed in moderation). By contrast, ﬂipping 
arousal from high to low will not ﬂip the ethical value of the state from nega-
tive to positive, or vice versa. A highly negatively valenced state is still eth ic-
al ly bad, regardless of how drowsy or energized you feel when in it. Your 
claim to medical resources to help you alleviate that state is still strong either 
way. The arousal dimension of aﬀect at most modulates the strength of the 
claim.
This idea that valence has a strong and special ethical signi!cance can be 
reached from a variety of ethical starting points. One route runs through clas-
sical (hedonic) utilitarianism. For the progenitors of the classical utilitarian 
view, Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, the basic ethical imperative is to 
do the most good. Goodness is understood as happiness, and happiness is 
understood as a state of pleasure and the absence of pain, where both ‘pleas-
ure’ and ‘pain’ are interpreted deliberately broadly, capturing what many 
would now call positively valenced and negatively valenced aﬀect, respectively.21 
As far as possible, then, one should avoid causing negatively valenced 
experiences and try to promote positively valenced experiences. In this 
eth ic al framework, the valence of an experience is crucially important, for it 
determines whether that experience contributes positively or negatively to the 
calculation that determines the right course of action. Arousal may matter too 
for a classical utilitarian, in so far as it may modulate the experienced dur-
ation and/or intensity of hedonic states,22 but the ethical signi!cance of 
arousal is much less fundamental than the ethical signi!cance of valence.
21 See Bentham (1789/1879); Mill (1861/1887). More recent works in the utilitarian tradition, 
such as Singer (1980/2011) and Varner (2012) agree about the special signi!cance of valenced 
experience.
22 The modulation eﬀect is complicated and depends on valence. It is not just a matter of high- 
arousal experiences having a longer perceived duration (Piovesan et al. 2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
