5ME 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
coordinated, adaptive behavioural responses is acknowledged, but this sys-
tem is posited to be performing a wholly unconscious kind of processing. As a 
result, the two- system theorist will be largely unmoved by animal work 
exploring the detailed workings of the lower- level system. This work will 
never deliver proof of the involvement of consciousness, so it will never be 
able to refute the two- system picture.
For example, two- system theorists can gladly grant that electrical stimula-
tion of subcortical areas triggers coordinated, adaptive behavioural responses, 
but they will deny that these are aptly described as ‘emotional responses’ or 
that they involve any conscious feelings. Moreover, they can acknowledge 
that losing the lower- level system is highly debilitating, sometimes tanta-
mount to pulling out the brain’s power cable, leading to a general loss of con-
sciousness, just as pulling out the power cable from a computer will switch oﬀ 
the screen without thereby being the screen. They can also happily agree that 
a decorticated animal will still be able to display coordinated, midbrain- 
controlled behaviours. They will just insist that all of this goes on without any 
conscious accompaniment. Another impasse.
The parallels with the blindsight debate are striking. In the blindsight case, 
current evidence and methods seem to leave us with a serious under deter-
min ation problem, unable to choose between alternative reasonable in ter-
pret ations of the data. The same goes for this debate. Indeed, our ability to 
settle the disagreement in the case of aﬀect is arguably even weaker than our 
ability to settle the corresponding disagreement about blindsight. As noted 
already, one approach with the potential to discriminate between the two 
sides involves using subliminal visual stimuli to elicit unconscious aﬀect, but 
that approach has been inconclusive so far, and is likely to remain so. It is 
hard to be sure the putatively subliminal stimuli truly elude conscious per-
ception, and hard to conﬁdently rule out the possibility that the aﬀective 
response they elicit is consciously felt. Yet it is only fair to point out that the 
types of studies Panksepp took to support his view are also far from conclu-
sive. Direct stimulation of subcortical circuits induces strong and coherent 
behavioural responses, suggestive at face value of strong feelings, but that is 
not a strong argument against an opponent like LeDoux, who  posits that 
coordinated behavioural control circuits can operate below the level of con-
scious experience.
When we put LeDoux’s and Panksepp’s pictures side by side, we see 
im port ant points of agreement. Take fear, for example. Both agree that there 
is a mechanism, in which the amygdala plays a crucial role, that drives a char-
acteristic set of behaviours such as freezing and escape, and has characteristic 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
