5ML 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
But there is always room for a critic to say: that is because a substantial back-
ground of neural similarity to humans can be safely assumed when we are 
interpreting the behaviour of mammals. In non- mammals, the underlying 
brain mechanisms are likely to diﬀer, undermining any secure inference (by 
IBE) to sentience.55
The result is room for reasonable doubt about whether the behaviours we 
observe in non- mammals are produced by conscious experiences, even set-
ting aside the main philosophical source of doubt (epiphenomenalism) dis-
cussed in the previous chapter. I mentioned in Chapter 1 that I do not agree 
with derogatory labels like ‘sentience denier’ for those who harbour such 
doubts, and my reasons should be clearer now. One can accept that sentience 
is an evolved adaptation and yet still suspect it might be a distinctively mam-
malian adaptation, evolved since the divergence from birds, and implemented 
in the neocortex.
At the same time, dogmatic insistence on the special importance of the 
neocortex to sentience is unreasonable, given the current state of the evi-
dence, especially in practical contexts where we are trying to decide what 
precautions to take. The potential for subcortical mechanisms and analogues 
of the cortex to support sentience needs to be taken seriously. The case of birds 
is salutary. No one would, I hope, seriously try to argue that because the avian 
pallium is nucleated whereas the neocortex is laminar, nothing we do to a 
bird can be cruel, reckless, negligent, or in any way ethically problematic. The 
clear functional analogies should prompt us to think seriously about risk. 
The need to take a precautionary step here, where we accept ethical limits on 
our behaviour arising from the evidence that does exist (inconclusive though 
it may be), is obvious. And once we see this, it is not a huge step to see that 
similar reasoning can lead to ethical limits on our actions towards reptiles, 
ﬁsh, invertebrates, and other cases at the edge of sentience, even though the 
evidence in these cases is even more limited.
5.7 Summary of Chapter 5
This chapter has focused on sources of disagreement in the science of con-
sciousness and emotion. To have a science of consciousness at all, we need 
reliable ways of disentangling conscious and unconscious processing. In the 
55 See Sober (2000, p. 376) for a related argument, though framed in terms of likelihoods rather 
than IBE.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
