%MP 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
Outside of clear- cut cases, views will diﬀer a great deal about what it takes to 
do enough— about when exactly our treatment of our fellow sentient beings 
becomes cruel or negligent. Diﬀerent background views about the ethical sig-
niﬁcance of sentience will lead to reasonable disagreement about what is pro-
portionate in the non- obvious cases, and we need processes for resolving 
these disagreements.
That issue will be the focus of Chapter 8, where I will oﬀer a ‘pragmatic 
analysis’ of proportionality intended to help us think through non- obvious 
cases. For now, I want to emphasize that a duty to take proportionate steps is 
one that can be supported from within any reasonable ethical, religious, or 
philosophical picture. Indian religions will see the duty as arising from 
ahimsa; Abrahamic religions will see it as arising from the duty of steward-
ship. For Kant, the duty will be one we owe to ourselves, as part of our duty to 
cultivate morally good dispositions. For Rawls, such a duty would Aow from 
the duty of compassion he acknowledges we owe to animals. For animal 
rights theorists it would Aow from much stronger duties of justice, and would 
involve very strong demands. For utilitarians, it would Aow from the prin-
ciple of utility, which would also be our guide to what counts as ‘enough’. For 
virtue theorists, it would Aow from what Knutsson and Munthe have called 
the virtue of precaution: in essence, the virtue of avoiding the reckless or neg-
ligent imposition of risks on others.;E Proponents of these views may well 
disagree about what the proportionate steps are in any given case, but not 
about whether we should take proportionate steps.
Among cases of ‘gratuitous’ suﬀering, we can distinguish two main types:
 (i) a person engages in an activity (such as torturing an animal for fun) 
where the reason for causing suﬀering is so weak, on any view in the 
zone of reasonable disagreement, that the only proportionate response 
is to cease the activity altogether;
 (ii) a person engages in an activity (e.g. farming, animal research) where 
the reason for causing suﬀering is strong according to at least one view 
in the zone of reasonable disagreement, and yet they fail to take pro-
portionate steps to mitigate the risk of causing suﬀering.
The two types of case need to be handled quite diﬀerently. The second type 
requires in- depth discussion about whether some precautions short of ceas-
ing the activity can meet the tests of proportionality, whereas the ﬁrst type of 
;E Knutsson and Munthe (2017).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
