K4 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
Yet there is more to pain than this sensory element. It also feels very bad and 
is a high- arousal state.11
Because of the strong sensory ‘injury detection’ element of pain, it is usu-
ally not described as an emotion, even though it may lead to emotions such as 
frustration, anguish, or despair.12 But it clearly has an aﬀective component, 
and this is one reason why the broader terms ‘aﬀect’ and ‘feeling’ are o6en 
more useful than the narrower ‘emotion’. The aﬀective aspect of pain is very 
high- arousal and very negatively valenced (feels very bad). Much the same 
can be said of other deeply unpleasant bodily states, such as hunger, thirst, 
and breathlessness.13 They are not purely aﬀective, but they have an aﬀective 
aspect.
We can try to imagine, though it is not easy, how the sensory and aﬀective 
aspects of pain might come apart in other animals. In principle, an animal 
could have a state with similar phenomenal characteristics to pain on the 
aﬀective side (very high negative valence, high arousal), without much, or 
even any, associated phenomenal character on the sensory side. We could 
only describe such a state, imperfectly, as something like a ‘feeling of things 
going very badly, calling for amelioration with high urgency’. In fact, some 
people describe experiencing a feeling like this during sepsis. Clinicians o6en 
struggle to put this feeling into words, sometimes calling it ‘the feeling that 
you’re about to die’ or ‘the feeling of impending doom’. The concept of pain 
seems inapt in this situation, because the location- speci!c sensory aspect is 
absent, and it may conceivably be a poor description of the feelings of some 
other animals for the same reason.
For instance, the small amount of evidence that exists concerning nocicep-
tion in sharks suggests they do have nociceptors in the cranial region, yet lack 
nociceptors in the rest of the body.14 It does not follow that sharks feel noth-
ing whatsoever when injured on the body, but it does seem likely that bodily 
injury does not feel to a shark the way it does to us. Perhaps (speculatively) 
serious injury feels to the shark like sepsis does to humans: a feeling of every-
thing going very badly wrong at once, not tied to a speci!c location.
11 Auvray et al. (2010); Shriver (2006, 2018a, 2018b).
12 The term ‘suﬀering’ is sometimes used to describe the pain itself, but is also sometimes reserved 
for the subsequent emotions (leading to the possibility of pain without suﬀering). I will use the term 
deliberately broadly, as a synonym for ‘negatively valenced experience’. In this sense, both the pain 
itself and the emotions it typically induces are forms of suﬀering.
13 Derek Denton has suggested that these bodily sensations may be among the most evolutionarily 
ancient feelings, calling them ‘primordial emotions’ (Denton 2006; Denton et al. 2009).
14 Lacap (2022).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
