46 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
3.1 Disagreeing Reasonably about Sentience
A ﬁrst step is to distinguish between reasonable and unreasonable dis agree-
ment about sentience. Our task will then be to ﬁnd procedures that help us to 
manage reasonable disagreement while avoiding unreasonable disagreement. 
An important idea here is that the existence of serious, persistent dis agree-
ment about sentience in science and philosophy does not mean anything goes, 
that all opinions on these issues are equally justiﬁed. There is a zone of rea-
son able disagreement, wide yet bounded.
Both people and the positions they hold can be reasonable or un rea son-
able. A reasonable person is one who displays certain characteristic virtues to 
at least a minimal degree: they care about, and respond to, evidence and 
 reasons; they respect scientiﬁc evidence, on the whole, even if they are scep-
tic al of some scientiﬁc results; they want to reach agreement with those they 
disagree with; they are not wantonly reckless in the face of risk; and their 
values are not completely abhorrent. Meanwhile, a reasonable position is one 
that a reasonable person could hold a4er consulting all the relevant, currently 
existing evidence. Reasonable disagreement happens when both ingredients 
are in place: we have a disagreement between reasonable people holding rea-
son able positions.
I realize this description of ‘reasonableness’ is a little abstract. I hope the 
following three caricatures will help bring it to life.
Baseless Recommendations
Imagine someone tells you adamantly that you must not use antibacterial 
soap. To do this causes appalling pain to the bacteria. You must ﬁrst anaesthe-
tize the bacteria by soaking your hands for ﬁve minutes in orange juice. Then 
you can use the soap.
You would not take this person seriously— why not? Not because you have 
a complete, empirically well- established theory of sentience that decisively 
rules out, with absolute certainty, sentience in bacteria. No one has this. You 
cannot simply confront this person with undisputed scientiﬁc facts that 
exclude their view. The real reason is that the person is recommending a 
course of action without being able to provide any positive justiﬁcation that 
5ows from a credible, evidence- based theoretical and explanatory frame-
work. They are just making stu! up.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
