4I 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
metacognition, but rejected by those (like Merker) who maintain that there 
isDno such link.17
The blindsight debate also crystallizes a second general problem: the prob-
lem of confounders. For even if you reach the point where you are sure you 
have identiﬁed two visual pathways (one consciousness- involving, one wholly 
consciousness- free) you still face the challenge of trying to identify which 
parts of the consciousness- involving pathway are part of the basis of con-
scious experience, as opposed to being mere precursors or mere conse-
quences. Everyone agrees retinal stimulation is not a constitutive part of the 
conscious state (just a precursor), and everyone agrees that the behavioural 
output (e.g. a verbal utterance) is not part of it either (just a consequence). 
But there will always be a long chain of steps between retina and report, and 
about each of these steps we can ask: is it a mere precursor, a mere conse-
quence, or part of the neural basis of consciousness?1A
It is not clear how to answer this question without falling back— 
circularly— on a contentious theoretical assumption. Proponents of particu-
lar theories tend to regard the processes taken to be important by their rivals 
as mere precursors, or mere consequences, of conscious sensory experience, 
and thus as confounders to be controlled- for rather than the basis of con-
sciousness. Those who posit the neural basis of consciousness to be in the back 
of the cortex see processes in prefrontal cortex as downstream of experience— 
and a source of confounders for which we need to control. Meanwhile, those 
who favour the front of the cortex see local recurrent processing in visual 
areas as upstream of experience— and a source of confounders for which we 
need to control.
The result is an impasse. Neither side is able to perform an intervention in 
which they hold ﬁxed everything upstream and downstream of the mech an ism 
they regard as pivotal, so as to observe whether phenomenal consciousness is 
switched on and oﬀ by manipulating that mechanism in isolation. The funda-
mental roadblock is not that this sort of intervention is technically di6cult, nor 
that it is unethical to perform in humans. It is that we un avoid ably need the 
downstream processes to verify whether phenomenal consciousness was oﬀ or 
on. The very processes many see as sources of confounders are also processes on 
which we depend for evidence of the presence of the phenomenon.
In sum, consciousness science is in a seriously tough methodological pre-
dicament even before we consider any non- human cases, and even when we 
17 Seth (2008); Phillips (2021a).
1A Aru et al. (2012).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
