TH.,, A2T,.(ATIV,4 
54K
proportionate measures for managing risk are simply those that maximize 
expected WELLBYs.
Even when applied to policies that only a;ect unambiguously sentient 
humans, there is a sense in which this approach entrenches, rather than 
avoids, the tyranny of expert values. This is because there are value judge-
ments involved in constructing a well- being measure.8D For example, to judge 
that what we value in public policy is exhausted by hedonic well- being— 
subjective experiences with positive or negative valence— is a substantive 
value judgement (one with a hedonic utilitarian ﬂavour) that many people 
reasonably reject.8E To impose the WELLBY is to impose a certain type of 
utilitarian thinking, rather than to acknowledge and resolve conﬂict between 
di;erent conceptions of well- being. The imposition could be justiﬁed only 
if we believed in the contentious view of ethical expertise rejected above— 
and, moreover, only if we thought hedonic utilitarians were the only real 
experts. As Johanna Thoma has argued, this approach is at odds with the 
principle that value conﬂicts in a democratic society should be resolved 
democratically.8F
When thinking of systems at the edge of sentience, we face the additional 
problem of how to measure WELLBYs for those systems. The measurement of 
hedonic well- being in humans is heavily reliant on self- report through ques-
tionnaires, a method of limited use in our cases. Moreover, we face the ques-
tion of how to weight non- human WELLBYs in comparison with human 
WELLBYs. Is a canine WELLBY worth the same as a human WELLBY— or is 
it worth seven? Intuitively, the subjective ‘speed’ at which the animals live 
their lives should somehow be factored into a calculation of hedonic well- 
being, but we don’t know how to do that, and, even if we did, we would not 
have the evidence to do it in an informed way. A deep problem of interspecies 
comparison arises for any version of hedonic utilitarianism.8G Many rules for 
weighing WELLBYs across species are possible; the problem is that we have 
insuﬃcient reason to favour any particular rule over any other. Even if we 
could solve these daunting problems, we would still run into the problems of 
the preceding paragraph.
So, citizens’ panels and assemblies have distinctive advantages over techno-
crat ic common currencies, over democratic approaches that lead to propor-
tionality becoming a partisan battleground, and over a direct democratic 
approach.
8D Alexandrova (2018); Thoma (2022b).
8E Nozick (1974).
8F Thoma (2022b).
8G Browning (2023).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
