P(OPOSA4S ABOU, SP.CI+IC CAS.S 
3
Proposal 4. Avoid line- drawing (speciﬁc). Decisions about withdrawing life- 
sustaining treatment should be based on comprehensive assessment of the 
patient’s best interests, sensitive to the details of their case, and not on the 
PVS/MCS distinction.
Proposal 5. The need for more humane options. Methods of hastening death 
other than through withdrawal of clinically assisted nutrition and hydration 
(CANH) are needed. At minimum, clinicians should not face any risk of pun-
ishment for administering large doses of sedatives or analgesics afer a deci-
sion to withdraw CANH has been made.
Proposal 6. Waiting for more information. If a humane method of hastening 
death becomes available, there will be no strong rationale for withdrawing 
life- sustaining treatment within days afer injury, before the patient’s condi-
tion has stabilized. Given the great uncertainty about prospects for recovery 
at this stage, the default approach should be to delay the decision until the 
patient’s condition has stabilized.
Human Fetuses and Embryos
Proposal 7. Sentience and abortion. The point at which a human fetus 
becomes sentient is not the point at which abortion becomes morally imper-
missible. We should separate these issues. The ethics of abortion depend pri-
marily on questions of personhood and bodily autonomy, not on questions of 
sentience.
Proposal 8. Human sentience candidature begins early. Human fetuses are 
sentience candidates from the beginning of the second trimester. This line 
may move as new evidence emerges, but it should always track the earliest 
scientiﬁcally credible, evidence- based estimate.
Proposal 9. Fetal pain relief (in therapeutic contexts). Direct fetal anaesthesia 
and pain relief should be considered whenever therapeutic fetal surgery is 
performed. The public should be involved in discussions about general norms 
of medical practice (not speciﬁc decisions), and data regarding current prac-
tices should be collected and published to allow such discussions.
Proposal 10. Fetal pain relief (in the context of abortion). Clinicians need to 
communicate uncertainty about fetal sentience honestly to patients. In some 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
