)4M 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
Proposal 16. Sentience is neither intelligence nor brain size. We should be 
aware of the possibility of decouplings between intelligence, brain size, 
and sentience in the animal kingdom. Precautions to safeguard animal 
welfare should be driven by markers of sentience, not by markers of 
intelligence or by brain size.
12.3 The Story of the ‘Sentience Act’
The European Union’s Lisbon Treaty contains a clause that says:
In formulating and implementing the Union’s agriculture, ﬁsheries, trans-
port, internal market, research and technological development and space 
policies, the Union and the Member States shall, since animals are sentient 
beings, pay full regard to the welfare requirements of animals, while respect-
ing the legislative or administrative provisions and customs of the Member 
States relating in particular to religious rites, cultural traditions and regional 
heritage.28
The reference to sentience is easy to miss. No mechanism has ever been created 
to oversee compliance and crucial details have gone unspeciﬁed. The question 
‘which animals?’ jumps out, but has never been settled. In theory, the clause 
could be read as demanding consideration of all members of the animal 
kingdom, including microscopic animals like the dust mites in bedsheets and 
the copepods that occasionally get into drinking water, but it is safe to assume 
that no court would uphold such an interpretation.
The EU, much like the UK until recently, has tended to regard the scope of 
animal welfare law as an issue that only requires precise resolution in the 
context of regulating scientiﬁc research. A directive in 2010 ‘on the protection 
of animals used for scientiﬁc purposes’29 explicitly included all cephalopod 
molluscs, including cuttleﬁsh, squid, and nautilus, on the advice of an 
expert panel.2; The panel had recommended including all cephalopod 
 molluscs and all decapod crustaceans (decapods), including crabs, lobsters, 
crayﬁsh, and shrimps, but the recommendation regarding decapods was 
28 Treaty of Lisbon Amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty Establishing the 
European Community, Signed at Lisbon, 13 December 2007.
29 European Union Directive 2010/63/EU.
2; European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (2005).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
