17
The Run-Ahead Principle
What can we do to manage risk in our current state of great uncertainty? 
When designing precautions to manage the risks associated with creating a 
new type of sentient being, time may not be on our side.
We could be lucky: it could be that artiﬁcial sentience arrives via a heavily 
trailed route, having been widely discussed and anticipated for decades. 
Societal norms may have time to shif before they need to shif. But we could 
also be taken by surprise. It could be that a sudden breakthrough brings the 
ﬁrst artiﬁcial sentience candidate into the world, rather like the way, from the 
point of view of all those outside the Manhattan Project, the atomic bomb 
entered the world as though from nowhere, without time for any society- wide 
discussion of the norms governing its use. This latter scenario seems all the 
more likely if AI research continues to be as secretive and commercially 
driven as it is now.
This prospect of credibly sentient AI emerging as if from nowhere, prior to 
any serious society- wide discussion of what to do about it, is one I ﬁnd espe-
cially concerning. It is why I have been emphasizing the importance of having 
discussions now, when no artiﬁcial sentience candidates yet exist. Moreover, I 
think we need to do more than just discuss; we also need to be taking precau-
tionary actions now.
We need to do this partly for our own sake, because it is in our own inter-
ests (as humans) to exert agency over our future. Given the chance, perhaps 
we would collectively decide not to go down the path of creating sentient AI 
at all. More likely, perhaps, we might collectively decide to prepare for that 
transition, so that it can happen without huge social ruptures. At the moment, 
our future in this area is largely out of own hands, decided in the boardrooms 
of tech companies, and this should trouble all of us. But we should also 
consider precautions as part of our general duty to avoid causing gratuitous 
suﬀering to sentient beings. We should not want the ﬁrst sentient AI systems 
to lead lives of terrible suﬀering, as humans regard them as playthings on 
which they can experiment without limit. We should try to make sure that the 
ﬁrst generations of sentient AI are not remembered, many years later, as a 
source of shame.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
