2(TUB(B AB B(.T,(.)( )A.C,CAT(B 
MN6
They can shif probabilities upwards by, for example, showing us that the 
conditions of less demanding theories of consciousness (such as those of 
Merker and Panksepp) are plausibly met. And while we are all free to explore 
the space of possible theories of consciousness, we need to avoid overconﬁ-
dence about our own preferred theories. Even if our sympathies lie with the-
or ies at the relatively cognitively demanding end of the spectrum, we need to 
acknowledge a risk that serious theories at the less cognitively demanding 
end may be correct, and we need to manage that risk as best we can.
In 2010, Derbyshire was part of a working group of the Royal College of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) that was tasked with reviewing 
the evidence of ‘fetal awareness’. The working group concluded that:
cortical processing of pain perception, and therefore the ability of the fetus 
to feel pain, cannot occur before 24 weeks of gestation . . . . It is reasonable to 
infer from this that the fetus does not require analgesia for interventions 
occurring before 24 weeks of gestation.:E
The group found evidence that fetuses develop nociceptors (specialized 
receptors sensitive to tissue damage) at around 10–13 weeks’ gestation. The 
group also found evidence that spontaneous movements and reﬂexes can be 
observed from as early as 8 weeks, and that ‘the fetus withdraws from a nee-
dle from about 18 weeks and also launches a stress response following needle 
puncture’. Yet the working group interpreted this evidence with a sceptical 
eye, concluding that ‘The fetal spinal cord and brainstem develop well before 
the cerebral cortex. This means that these reﬂex movements occur without 
any possibility of fetal awareness.’;F They doubled down on this point a few 
pages later: ‘Activity in the spinal cord, brainstem and subcortical midbrain 
structures are suJcient to generate reﬂexive behaviours and hormonal 
responses but are not suJcient to support pain awareness.’;1
There is a particularly weak line in the report that, to my mind, encapsu-
lates what I think of as the anti- precautionary fallacy. The working group 
writes that ‘most pain neuroscientists believe that the cortex is necessary for 
pain perception . . . . The lack of cortical connections before 24 weeks, there-
fore, implies that pain is not possible until afer 24 weeks.’;: If pain before 24 
weeks could be conclusively ruled out, premising action on that assumption 
:E Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2010, p. 15).
;F Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2010, p. 5).
;1 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2010, p. 7).
;: Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2010, p. 11).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
