64 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
by particles, and conscious experiences are somehow (and this has always 
been the hard part) produced by or grounded in the activity of neurons.
The closest philosophical precursor to IIT’s ontology, in my view, is the 
idealism of Leibniz. IIT shares with Leibniz a commitment to the idea that 
what exists (at least, what exists fundamentally) is conscious. But whereas 
Leibniz’s world consisted of conscious ‘monads’ causally isolated from each 
other, harmonized by God, IIT posits that conscious beings do causally inter-
act with each other, and indeed this causation is at the heart of the theory. 
Against this background, the question arises: what is the interface through 
which one conscious being can interact with another? In IIT’s language, what 
is the ‘operational basis’ of consciousness? The theory provides an answer: it 
will be the region of the brain with maximum causal integration, or max-
imum ‘phi’ (Ф). This is hypothesized to be a posterior hot zone at the back of 
the cortex. In short, brains, bodies, and neurons do not exist intrinsically at 
all, but brain regions of maximal Ф are the way in which conscious beings 
manifest extrinsically in the experiences of other conscious beings. They are 
what another conscious being looks like from the outside.
There is a kind of internal elegance, even beauty, to the IIT picture. I can 
see why it has attracted followers, and indeed why the followers are so ardent. 
In embracing a form of idealism, it comprehensively rejects the austere 
ma teri al ist outlook of the rest of neuroscience. It avoids any de5ation of con-
sciousness to a second- tier ontological status, preserving the intuitively 
appealing idea that consciousness is real and fundamental. It represents a 
certain kind of release from an unpleasant set of materialist strictures that 
seem to downgrade consciousness and its importance. Instead, it is the brain 
that gets downgraded. Tononi et al. even include illustrations in which a 2D, 
black- and- white brain dangles o! a blossoming, technicolour mind, a mere 
operational substrate for what truly, intrinsically exists.
At the same time, it is easy to see why IIT has attracted trenchant critics. 
Some criticize the theory simply for having metaphysical commitments that 
cannot be tested empirically. I see this as a mistake, since any theory of con-
sciousness must have such commitments (it is just that, when the commit-
ments fall within the window of standard materialism, they are not especially 
salient). A fairer criticism is that IIT’s explanatory credentials are very hard 
for neutral observers to evaluate, because the theory aims to explain con-
sciousness in a way very unlike the way materialist theories seek to explain it. 
Indeed, for mainstream cognitive neuroscience, the kind of explanations 
o!ered by IIT are hard to recognize as explanations at all. Reading passages 
like the one I quoted, they are likely to say: ‘an “explanation” on which 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
