8
Debating Proportionality
In the last chapter, I proposed entrusting citizens’ panels/assemblies with 
judgements about proportionality. Expert panels would make a judgement 
about whether a system is a sentience candidate but would not decide what 
precautions to take. Deliberation about proportionate responses should 
involve the public. There are deep value conﬂicts at the edge of sentience, and 
citizens’ panels are well placed to ﬁnd resolutions. Yet for this idea to work in 
practice, we need a procedure that commands our conﬁdence: conﬁdence 
that all relevant considerations would be properly taken into account, conﬁ-
dence that the panel would be competent to take them into account, and con-
ﬁdence in the recommendations at the end of the process.
My aim in this chapter is to propose one such procedure. I do not see my 
proposal as the only way of structuring deliberation. There will be alterna-
tives. But I do think it would be one viable and eﬀective way. That is enough 
in the context, since my aim is to reply to an imagined critic who says: ‘This 
could not even possibly work. We could never be justiﬁed in trusting such a 
panel to make such important judgements.’
8.1 Curating Options: Learning from  
the Climate Assembly UK
The procedure I envisage involves a citizens’ panel starting out with a short-
list of options that have been deemed feasible by policy- makers and their sci-
entiﬁc advisers. The ﬁrst question arises: who decides which options make it 
on to the shortlist? The Climate Assembly UK allowed experts to decide. In 
each policy area, a small shortlist of proposals was drawn up by experts, and 
the assembly was asked to deliberate vote on these proposals.
This creates a risk that some live options will be omitted from the list— a 
risk, in other words, that the tyranny of expert values will assert itself at the 
stage of ﬁltering the options that reach the assembly. Indeed, when we look in 
detail at the options presented to Climate Assembly UK, some radical options 
appear to have been omitted. For example, the UK Green Party has proposed 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
