4E 
%HE +(,EN(E )0 ()N+(,)-+NE++ .N/ E:)%,)N
For all this, Phillips’s view has a place in the zone of reasonable disagree-
ment. Phillips has not conclusively established the correctness of this view of 
blindsight, but he has shown that there is a fair if unorthodox reading of the 
empirical evidence according to which the blindsight pathway does generate 
a very simple form of conscious visual experience. It is a realistic empirical 
possibility that human visual experience does not strictly require the visual or 
prefrontal cortex.
An upshot is that a yet wider range of theoretical perspectives can be recon-
ciled with the blindsight data, including theories on which the midbrain 
mechanisms involved in blindsight, such as the superior colliculus, already 
su6ce for conscious visual experience by themselves, with or without the 
involvement of the cortex. An important example of such a theory is that of 
Bjorn Merker, which posits that conscious sensory experience can be gener-
ated by ‘the triad of large structures physically encircling the brainstem 
re ticu lar formation at the level of the midbrain, namely, the periaqueductal 
gray matter, the superior colliculus, and the substantia nigra (or their non- 
mammalian homologs/analogs)’.12
Merker’s theory does not deny the importance of the cortex to the content 
of normal conscious experience in humans. But the theory sees the cortex as 
more akin to a graphics card than a CPU: the cortex greatly enriches the con-
tent of our experiences when working properly, elevating our visual content 
from ‘black shadows on a black background’ to full, rich technicolour, but it 
is not required to have conscious experiences of a less rich variety. As Merker 
recognized from the beginning, the theory has potentially signiﬁcant implica-
tions for people with brain injuries and for non- human animals, because it 
implies that at least a minimal form of conscious experience can be achieved 
without a cortex or anything functionally analogous to a cortex.
Brainstem- centred theories such as Merker’s have always struggled to 
accommodate blindsight. The blindsight data, interpreted in the orthodox 
way, support a cortex- centred view on which the brainstem is like a power 
cable, necessary to ‘switch on’ conscious experience (and involved in regulating 
sleep- wake cycles) but not constitutive of it, any more than a TV’s power cable 
constitutes the picture. For, a7er all, blindsight is supported by midbrain 
mechanisms and yet has no associated phenomenology, according to the 
received wisdom. This was the source of much of the initial sceptical reaction 
to Merker’s theory.18 If, however, Phillips is correct to suggest that blindsight 
is degraded conscious vision, Merker’s theory becomes more plausible.
12 Merker (2007, p. 110).
18 Doesburg and Ward (2007); Piccinini (2007); Schlag (2007); Watkins and Rees (2007).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
