8..)CT0M) /-8C)/ D)OO,9 T() (:B8, C8/) 
KK
extremes of the arousal dimension (alarmed, tired) being much less intensely 
valenced than those in the middle of the arousal dimension (miserable, sad).
Three central components of the aﬀective circumplex model can be distin-
guished. First, valence and arousal are postulated to be the main dimensions 
that both organize our thinking about emotional categories and structure our 
aﬀective experiences. Second, our emotion terms do not just form clusters in 
valence/arousal space but form a continuous ring around the origin: a cir-
cumplex. We have terms that cover, admittedly in a fairly coarse- grained way, 
all directions out from the origin. Third, there is no strong justi!cation for 
adding further dimensions to the space.
At the time, this third idea was a controversial one, because many authors 
had suggested various other candidates for the third main dimension, includ-
ing ‘dominance/submissiveness’ and ‘attention/rejection’. Russell’s conclu-
sion was that adding a third dimension would not help resolve further 
clusters of emotion categories. Yes, lots of other things matter in particular 
cases (e.g. to the diﬀerence between fear and anger, which are similar in 
valence and arousal), but none of these other factors amounts to a general 
structuring principle for our classi!cation of emotions, orthogonal to valence 
and arousal.
No consensus around any speci!c third dimension has since emerged. 
I should emphasize, though, that it is no part of this model to say that these 
two dimensions exhaustively characterize our experiences of emotion. They 
do not. The idea is simply that the individuating features that allow us to tease 
out !ner- grained categories (such as anger vs fear) do not amount to general 
structuring principles.
2.4 Aﬀective Spaces beyond the Human Case
Valence and arousal are likely to be much more widely applicable in the nat-
ural world than concepts for particular emotions, such as ‘fear’ and ‘sadness’. 
They may even be of wider relevance than ‘pain’, which has traditionally 
played a dominant role in discussions about the edge of sentience.
Pain is a complex experience with both sensory and aﬀective elements. It is 
usually triggered by nociception: the detection of actual or potential tissue 
damage by specialized receptors. Accordingly, we usually feel pain ‘in’ the 
location on the body at which the nociceptors were triggered. The ‘in’ here is 
describing the content of the experience: the pain presents as tied to a speci!c 
site on the body, even though the experience is generated by the brain. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
