89 
A WA() A(ON, -./ /0,/
For some, doubt begins when we turn to birds. The mammalian and avian 
lineages diverged between 170 and 340 million years ago.: There are substan-
tial similarities between the brains of mammals and birds but many di;er-
ences too. When we attribute sentience to birds, we are implicitly recognizing 
that sentience can be achieved in a brain with a substantially di;erent or gan-
iza tion from our own.
For others, doubt creeps in when we look beyond mammals and birds to 
other vertebrates, such as ﬁshes.6 Could a ﬁsh be a total subjective blank, like 
a ball or a rock? Could a ﬁsh feel no pain— or anything at all— when it is 
caught? Some have argued that we must take this possibility seriously. In 
response, some animal welfare scientists, motivated by understandable con-
cern about the welfare of ﬁshes, have called the sceptics ‘sentience deniers’.7 
Even though I think there is strong evidence for sentience in ﬁshes, I ﬁnd the 
‘sentience denier’ label too divisive in an area of genuine uncertainty.
Even those fully convinced that ﬁshes are sentient will have their own 
threshold of doubt. For some, it is to be found at the point where we turn our 
attention from vertebrates to invertebrates— from animals with a backbone to 
those without. When we look at an octopus, snail, bee, crab, or spider, we are 
looking at a lineage that has been separate from our own for at least 560 mil-
lion years.8 We are also considering an animal with a very, very di;erently 
organized brain. At this point, I think most— though not all— people start to 
entertain serious doubts about sentience.
Even those who cannot entertain such doubts about octopuses will tend to 
ﬁnd doubt assailing them regarding other invertebrates. Think, for example, 
of cnidarians like jellyﬁsh, sea anemones, and corals. Think also of very small 
crustaceans. On the windowsill in my kitchen I have an aquarium of brine 
shrimp, each a few millimetres in length. They are very commonly used in 
aquaculture— as live feed for other animals. I look at them and wonder: is 
there anything it’s like to be a brine shrimp? Copepods, another type of tiny 
crustacean, are famously added to New York’s tap water to clear out mosquito 
larvae.?
: For a wonderful tool for dating divergences, see https://www.timetree.org. The methodology is 
explained by Kumar et al. (2017).
6 Throughout the book, I will follow Balcombe’s (2016) suggestion to say ‘ﬁshes’ not ‘ﬁsh’ to help 
us remember that we are talking about individual animals.
7 Sneddon et al. (2018).
8 Divergences this ancient are exceptionally hard to date precisely. On the diﬃculties, see Peterson 
et al. (2004).
? Townsend (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
