.) 3E0,CH (F E2H.C05 F,0NEL(,O /,.)C./5E3 
%KF
should be no surprise to ﬁnd strong criticism of these ideas from animal 
rights theorists.;D Yet, if we were to add more substantial constraints, we 
would move away from consensus. That would be antithetical to my present 
aim, which is to construct a framework for reaching society- wide agreement 
on what to do regarding cases at the edge of sentience. For other aims, con-
sensus would be less important; but for this aim, it really matters, so I have to 
make the most of the thin consensus that exists.
Although the proposals from Banner, Casal, Flanders, and Zuolo all have 
merits, I want to propose a somewhat diﬀerent way of formulating the con-
sensus against gratuitous suﬀering. To begin with, let us move from ‘animal’ 
to ‘sentient being’, to make room for the possibility that some non- animals are 
or will be sentient. More subtly, I think the reliance on what is ‘reasonably 
possible’ leads to di8culties. It is always reasonably possible to stop what you 
are doing. It is reasonably possible for humans to stop experimenting on ani-
mals or farming animals for food. Indeed, it is even reasonably possible for 
humans to stop driving, thereby avoiding the suﬀering of the many animals 
accidentally hit by cars. It is reasonably possible for all of us to adopt Jainism. 
But there is no consensus that we ought to live like this. So there is in fact no 
agreement that we ought to do ‘as much as reasonably possible’.
As I see it, a more useful concept for capturing consensus, and one that I 
think lies in the background of Banner’s principles and of much UK animal 
welfare law, is that of proportionality. The real point of agreement is that, 
when pursuing activities such as these, we ought to take, at minimum, pro-
portionate steps to mitigate the risk of causing suﬀering. Proportionate steps 
are those that do enough to reduce the risk of causing suﬀering, taking all 
rele vant considerations into account, including the strength of the reasons for 
pursuing the activity, and whatever evidence we have concerning the severity 
and duration of the suﬀering that may be caused.
‘Enough’ is a vague concept, so ‘doing enough’ is a vague threshold. There 
can nonetheless be clear cases on both sides. In clear cases of animal cruelty, 
the perpetrator intentionally inAicts suﬀering without good reason, and so 
fails to take proportionate steps to prevent suﬀering. Meanwhile, a pet owner 
who diligently cares for her sick pet by following all relevant veterinary 
advice, minimizing the pet’s suﬀering as far as possible, is doing enough. 
;D Pepper (2017). On the tension between animal rights and liberalism more generally, see Read 
and Birch (2023). The same tension can be seen, Janus- like, as posing a ‘legitimacy challenge’ to ani-
mal rights theories (Schultz- Bergin 2017; see also Basl and Schouten 2018) or as casting doubt on the 
foundations of political liberalism (Berkey 2017; Garner 2013; Healey and Pepper 2021; Magaña 
2023; Plunkett 2016).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
