5O6./ O( 7OO6 0)15,-5. 1N6 2-5.N/-N7 /58.9./ 
28C
are currently used until a very high and possibly unattainable burden of proof 
is met concerning the link between that practice and poor welfare. A precau-
tionary approach should include safeguards that make it diﬃcult for an anti- 
precautionary attitude to take root. Accordingly, we need to ensure that new 
welfare guidelines are formulated in a way that is independent of the industry 
being regulated.
How to do this? One option is a licensing scheme for any new farming 
operation using ﬁsh, cephalopod molluscs, decapod crustaceans, or insects. 
To obtain approval to sell their products, the operation would have to submit 
a code of good practice with which it will comply, and allow itself to be 
inspected to ensure its compliance. If there is an existing code of good prac-
tice recognized as the industry standard, they need to pledge to comply with 
it. If there is no existing code of good practice, the business must pay for one 
to be drawn up by independent experts commissioned by the licensor (e.g. 
Defra in the UK), not by the company itself. The company must give these 
experts full access to its existing processes and allow them to require changes 
to these processes in the code of good practice. If the code of good practice 
contains commercially sensitive information, the company can ask for this 
information to be redacted when it is published.
Proposal 19. Codes of good practice and licensing. There should be a 
licensing scheme for companies attempting to farm sentience candidates 
or investigation priorities for which no welfare regulations yet exist (such 
as insects). Obtaining a license should be dependent on signing up to 
(and, where necessary, funding research leading to) a code of good 
practice concerning animal welfare.
I can see two likely sources of resistance. Firstly, the independent experts may 
end up requiring changes that the company regards as prohibitively expen-
sive. Imagine, for example, that experts require a shrimp breeder to stop eye-
stalk ablation. The breeder protests that this would put them out of business. 
The experts point to examples of operations that seem to be ﬁnancially viable 
without using eyestalk ablation.D The breeder argues that there are not many 
such operations, and that it would be an unacceptable commercial risk to try 
to emulate them.
D Wright (2016).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
