%HE ()N+(,)-+ .N/ %HE -N()N+(,)-+: %HE (.+E )0 12,N/+,3H%  
4?
front of the cortex form the neural basis of visual experience, since the 
 blindsight pathway does not reach these areas either. These prefrontal areas 
are downstream of the damage, receiving no visual information about the 
blind ﬁeld, so the absence of conscious experience in the blind ﬁeld is fully 
compatible with these areas playing a pivotal role.7 In short, the blindsight 
pathway lacks something that leaves it with no associated conscious ex peri-
ence, but there are many candidates for that something, and we are not able 
to zero in on a speciﬁc property or mechanism.
All of this, however, involves accepting the received wisdom that blindsight 
is a fully unconscious form of vision, and even this can be challenged. The 
received wisdom rests on the verbal reports of people with blindsight, who 
report seeing nothing in their blind ﬁeld. But must we interpret these reports 
as reliably indicating that their residual vision in the blind ﬁeld is uncon-
scious? There is an alternative view (defended vigorously by Ian Phillips) on 
which blindsight patients have severely degraded but still conscious vision in 
their blind ﬁeld. On this hypothesis, they report seeing nothing because the 
degradation is so severe and the experience so unlike normal visual ex peri-
ence. Their conscious vision in the blind ﬁeld takes a form in which ‘familiar 
contents have been dramatically stripped away or changed beyond comparison’.A 
For example, the most famous blindsight patient, GY, has described the 
experience of detecting a moving stimulus in the blind ﬁeld as that of seeing 
‘a black shadow moving on a black background’ and has said that ‘sometimes 
I’m aware of a motion, but that motion has no shape, no color, no depth, no 
form, no contrast’.B
This picture of blindsight as degraded conscious vision is unorthodox in 
consciousness science, and deservedly so, for reasons explained by Matthias 
Michel and Hakwan Lau in their response to Phillips.1C Among other, more 
technical criticisms, Michel and Lau stress that GY’s reports of residual 
awareness concern moving stimuli, whereas the strong performance in 
forced- choice tasks also exists for static stimuli, of which GY reports no 
awareness whatsoever. They emphasize that there can be huge discrepancies 
between task performance and reported awareness. In some experiments, 
task performance is carefully matched between the normal and blind ﬁelds by 
strengthening the stimulus presented to the blind ﬁeld, and yet reported 
awareness still diﬀers drastically.11
7 R.DBrown et al. (2019); Lau (2022); Mashour et al. (2020); Weiskrantz (1997).
A Phillips (2021b, p. 15).
B Phillips (2021b, p. 15).
1C Michel and Lau (2021a). For Phillips’s responses, see Phillips (2021a).
11 Persaud et al. (2011).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
