M+8(T :/,6:+/96 )D1)2+),:) 3)7E) ,/ T27:) /, .)(7E+/92F 
BG
3.2 Might Conscious Experience Leave 
No Trace on Behaviour?
When I talk to scientists in unrelated ﬁelds about sentience, I o4en encounter 
strong expressions of agnosticism. The answers to these questions, some say, are 
unknowable, beyond the reach of science— one cannot even gather evidence 
relevant to these questions. I suspect this attitude o4en 5ows from a certain 
type of background philosophical picture. That picture is epiphe nomenalism, 
according to which conscious experiences have no physical e!ects, and so leave 
no measurable imprint on the physical world. Conscious experience literally 
does nothing, so we cannot study it scientiﬁcally.H This is a view I reject myself, 
but I still think it has a place in the zone of reasonable dis agree ment, provided 
those who hold it do not dogmatically insist on its correctness.
Let us ﬁrst try to clarify the idea. The epiphenomenalist picture is not one 
on which experiences accompany brain processes completely at random, 
senselessly and lawlessly. The epiphenomenalist posits that there are psycho-
physical laws that link particular conscious experiences to particular neural 
states: the correlations are law- governed, not random. There are regular pat-
terns. So, conscious experiences can be followed very reliably by physical 
e!ects, but these e!ects are caused by the correlated neural state, not by the 
experience.
Epiphenomenalism was in5uential in late nineteenth- and early 
twentieth- century psychology, where it helped to shape the behaviourist 
tradition. The early behaviourist John  B.  Watson wrote that ‘one can 
assume either the presence or the absence of consciousness anywhere in 
the psychological scale without a!ecting the problems of behavior by one 
jot or one tittle; and without in5uencing in any way the mode of experimental 
attack upon them’.I Through behaviourism’s long legacy, the picture con-
tinues to exert in5uence, even though very few scientists trained today will 
hear the term ‘epiphe nomenalism’. I think it o4en slips in, namelessly, 
when people assume that because experience is ‘subjective’ and ‘private’, 
H The view in its modern form is usually credited to T. H. Huxley (1874).
I Watson (1913, p. 249). Just a few years earlier, Watson (1907) had been happy to talk of conscious 
mental states having e!ects that could be measured and detected. What changed? In the 1913 article, 
Watson describes ‘the parallelistic hypothesis’ as an obstacle to a functionalist psychology. The paral-
lelist agrees with the epiphenomenalist that conscious experiences have no e!ects in the physical 
world, but, unlike a pure epiphenomenalist, allows that they have e!ects in the mental realm. The two 
realms proceed in lockstep, exquisitely correlated but never causally in5uencing each other. It seems 
Watson’s understandable reaction to this idea was: if that’s what you mean by ‘consciousness’, we must 
purge psychology entirely of this thing called ‘consciousness’.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
