()N+(,)-+ .N/ -N()N+(,)-+ .00E(%J 
44
subjects with so- called aﬀective blindsight could verbally report the valence 
of the unseen stimulus in addition to guessing correctly in forced- choice 
tasks, suggesting that the aﬀective response was not unconscious a7er all.22 If 
this is correct, then the label ‘aﬀective blindsight’ is rather misleading. 
Blindsight of a visual stimulus is still involved, but the aﬀective part is not 
unconscious.
One aﬀective priming study, by Piotr Winkielman and colleagues, made an 
eﬀort to rule out the possibility that the eﬀects of unseen stimuli were medi-
ated by conscious feelings. Subjects were given a subliminal aﬀective prime 
(a happy or angry face) and then asked to pour, consume, and evaluate a 
lemon- and- lime ﬂavoured Kool Aid. The headline result was that ‘subliminal 
smiles caused thirsty participants to pour and consume more beverage . . . and 
increased their willingness to pay and their wanting more beverage’.28 More 
precisely, ‘thirsty participants drank 280% more of the beverage a7er happy 
primes than a7er angry primes’.2; Could it have been that subjects consciously 
felt better a7er seeing a subliminal smile, and that this upli7 in their mood 
caused a greater propensity to try the drink? To test this, Winkielman and 
colleagues explicitly asked subjects to rate their mood on a scale of −5 to +5, 
before and a7er the prime, and found no evidence of a congruent eﬀect on 
explicit mood ratings. Winkielman’s lab has since replicated both the priming 
eﬀect and the absence of any relationship to explicitly reported mood.25
This does not fully settle the issue, however, for two main reasons. First, 
aﬀective primes are weak stimuli exerting weak eﬀects on mood. Might they 
have been too weak for the subjects’ introspective abilities to discriminate the 
diﬀerences? The ideal would be to show that even in subjects with high intro-
spective acuity in relation to mood (assessed independently) the aﬀective 
prime still did not register in their explicit reports. Second, it is only fair to 
note that priming studies have become generally controversial due to their 
poor replication rates.26 This has led to renewed emphasis in psychology on 
the importance of replications in other labs. That is not a criticism of the 
original study, but it is a reason not to let a huge amount of weight rest on it.
In a diﬀerent priming study, some participants (presented with subliminal 
faces) were explicitly instructed to use their feelings as a guide to the valence 
of the emotion expressed in the face and yet failed to perform any better than 
controls.27 LeDoux and collaborators have interpreted this as showing that 
22 Anders et al. (2004).
28 Winkielman et al. (2005, p. 121).
2; Winkielman et al. (2005, p. 127).
25 Winkielman and Gogolushko (2018).
26 Open Science Collaboration (2015).
27 Bornemann et al. (2012).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
