BC 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
sentience depends on the material substrate (biological or non- biological) in 
which the system is realized. The zone also includes reasonable ethical dis-
agree ment: disagreement about the ethical signiﬁcance of sentience.
In all cases, the competing views on the table are all ‘reasonable’ in a spe-
ciﬁc sense: a proposal for action, based on reasons deriving from within that 
viewpoint, could not be fairly dismissed as baseless without further argu-
ment, in the way that a proposal to ban antibacterial soap, a proposal to disre-
gard animals without pineal glands, or a proposal to maximize animal 
su!ering could be so dismissed. The zone stakes out a space of reasonable 
bases for proposed actions (‘bases’ is used here as the plural of ‘basis’). That is 
a key step towards constructing a precautionary framework. The next step (to 
be taken later, in Chapters 6–8) will be to design procedures that help us 
decide what to do when we ﬁnd there are multiple proposed actions that all 
have reasonable bases.
The ‘zone’ is a spatial metaphor, and I like to visualize the zone of rea son-
able disagreement in a spatial way. Think of a serious space, a grave space: a 
parliamentary committee room, a courtroom, an operating theatre. I picture 
the zone of reasonable disagreement as akin to such a space. Evidence- free 
speculations may still have their own space elsewhere— the pub or café, or 
even the seminar room, book group, or lab meeting— but, for the purpose of 
making important, sober decisions a!ecting real lives, we need to create a 
space in which they are le4 at the door.
That is enough, I hope, to convey the idea of a ‘zone of reasonable dis agree-
ment’ and why it matters, without exaggerating the level of precision with 
which that zone can be circumscribed. My next task is to give a certain type 
of map of the zone. It is not a map of the terrain so much as a geological map. 
I am not trying to give an overview of all the topics on which people currently 
disagree. My aim is to capture the sources of persistent disagreement: sources 
we should expect to keep throwing up new disagreements, as a volcano expels 
fresh lava, long a4er our current disagreements cool and solidify.
This chapter will focus on sources of disagreement that have their origins 
in the philosophy of mind. The next chapter considers sources of ethical dis-
agree ment, considering both secular and religious viewpoints. Chapter 5 
turns to arguments of a more scientiﬁc nature. The boundary between phil-
oso phy and science is not at all sharp, and when the topic is sentience the 
boundary becomes even blurrier than usual. Nonetheless, I think vague dis-
tinctions (simply for the purposes of splitting three chapters) can still be 
drawn.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
