2(TA1 B(.T,(.)( A.C 3-D(.’B /,GHTB: B(5A/AT,.G9TH( ,BBU(B 
67H
towards adults in a chronic vegetative state. There are obvious diﬀerences 
between the vegetative state and the newborn state. And yet, in both cases, we 
ﬁnd sleep- wake cycles and a suite of reﬂexes and spontaneous behaviours, 
combined with an apparent absence of voluntary behaviour. Brainstem cir-
cuits controlling wakefulness, orientation, and reﬂex response, including the 
reticular activating system, are clearly active, but many cortical circuits linked 
to sophisticated cognitive functions are absent or inactive. The precautionary 
attitude that now seems so obvious in the neonate case is one we should carry 
across to the case of disorders of consciousness, where it is still controversial.
But we now need to consider the question: how far back in the process of 
human development should this precautionary attitude extend?
10.2 Fetal Sentience and Women’s Rights: 
Separating the Issues
Before we address that question head on, we need to distinguish it from a dif-
ferent one. Our question in this chapter is: when does a fetus become a sen-
tience candidate? In other words, when do we need to start taking seriously 
the possibility that fetuses are sentient, and start debating proportionate steps 
to protect them from suﬀering? At some point, all of us crossed that mysteri-
ous threshold, but we have no memory of when or how it happened, or even 
whether it was sudden or gradual.
I will focus speciﬁcally on the case of human fetuses. Similar issues arise 
regarding the fetuses of non- human animals, and they matter, but the 
human issues have a special urgency, and they weigh particularly heavily 
on many of us.
At face value, this may look to be the most politically sensitive— and poten-
tially incendiary— of all the questions we might ask about the edge of sen-
tience. That is because there intuitively seems to be a tight link to questions 
about women’s rights, and particularly the right to access abortion.1: We 
might initially be tempted to think: ‘it is wrong to abort a sentient fetus, so the 
legal time limit on abortion should be set at the earliest time sentience might 
realistically develop.’
1: In some cases, trans men and non- binary people also experience pregnancy. So, generic state-
ments about women and men made in this chapter should not be read as exceptionless. See Finn et al. 
(2023) for a discussion of pregnancy and gender.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
