(30 D)M).),N ,1 /A4,UR )2-/)C)( )N (30 -ARC (0.(. 
76N
For a second example, consider again the case of closing schools to prevent 
viral transmission: a classic case of value conﬂict. The harms imposed on 
schoolchildren will naturally be raised at every stage of discussion. But it is 
worth noting that, even if a panel has agreed that school closures are 
permissible- in- principle, adequate, and reasonably necessary, a further dis-
cussion is warranted about their consistency. Might they create a risk of harm 
that is so severe that it rivals the public health risk posed by the virus? If so, 
might it be a permissible- in- principle, adequate and reasonably necessary 
response to that risk to keep schools open?
That is the argument Sarah Lewis and colleagues made in a critique of 
school closures.9; They argued that closing schools put children at grave risk 
of harm, with the harms including ‘learning loss, reduced social interaction, 
isolation, reduced physical activity, increased mental health problems’, ‘poten-
tial for increased abuse, exploitation, and neglect’, and ‘reduced future income 
and life expectancy’. They concluded that ‘the precautionary principle would 
be to keep schools open to prevent catastrophic harms to children’.
If there are terrible risks of harm associated with both doing and not doing 
some speciﬁc action, the question becomes: can we ﬁnd some other response 
that is simultaneously proportionate to both risks, and that does not involve 
neglecting one to control the other? If we can ﬁnd such a Goldilocks response, 
this is the path we should take. If not, then we must make a value judgement 
about which risk is more severe and worthy of priority. In reality, the UK gov-
ernment took both paths at diﬀerent moments in the pandemic. In November 
2020, a lockdown excluding schools was attempted, to minimize harm to 
children. In January 2021, with the new Alpha variant rampant, schools were 
again closed: the immediate risk to public health was prioritized.
8.3 The Division of Labour Implicit in the PARC Tests
Let us return to the worries about deference and competence that motivated 
our search for a pragmatic analysis of proportionality. Our imagined critic 
says: issues at the edge of sentience are scientiﬁcally complex, so a citizens’ 
panel will not be competent to answer the questions we put to it. We can help 
the panel by having experts easily accessible, giving presentations and 
answering questions, but then the experts will end up revealing their views 
9; Lewis et al. (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
