%K9 
C()VE,-.)- () /,EC012.()3
grave issues are at stake. For all the obvious disagreement in consciousness 
science, we are far from a situation in which people are debating whether sen-
tience persists a!er brain death. When a decision to switch oﬀ the life- support 
of a clinically brain- dead patient is challenged in court, the courts can cor-
rectly cite a secure scientiﬁc meta- consensus around the proposition that 
sentience does not survive the death of the brain. Serious disputes in this area 
do not hinge on that question, but rather on the question of whether brain 
death has been accurately determined by clinical criteria.
We will meet examples of the second type of situation when discussing 
non- human animals (Part IV). For a very wide range of animals, including 
many invertebrates, a credible, evidence- based case for sentience can be 
mounted. But in other cases, we are faced with a frustrating lack of  evidence 
of the right kind, one way or the other. There is a temptation in these cases to 
loosen up the concept of a sentience candidate, allowing species to count as 
sentience candidates where there is a paucity of evidence one way or the 
other. But I do not take this path because of the practical role I want the con-
cept of a sentience candidate to play. The role of the concept is to trigger 
evidence- based discussions of possible precautions to manage welfare risks. 
Where the evidence base is simply not rich enough to guide the design of 
precautions or to allow assessments of their proportionality, the right 
response is to enrich the evidence base as a matter of urgency, not to take a 
guess at what might or might not help to mitigate welfare risks.
It will be helpful to have a second bridging concept to capture those cases 
where there is currently not enough evidence to render a system a sentience 
candidate, and yet there are urgent reasons to gather more evidence, because 
the risks of proceeding in ignorance are very high. This is the concept of an 
investigation priority:
A system S is an investigation priority if it falls short of the requirements for 
sentience candidature, yet:
(a)  further investigation could plausibly lead to the recognition of S as a 
sentience candidate; and
(b)  S is aﬀected by human activity in ways that may call for precautions if 
S were a sentience candidate.
When we turn, in Parts III–IV of the book, to speciﬁc cases, we will be ask-
ing: is this system a sentience candidate, an investigation priority, or neither of 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
