T(F)) M0)P/ O, T() ,8T:F) O. M8C),C) 
K;
At the same time, we should also take seriously the possibility that other 
animals might have states that blend sensory and aﬀective aspects in ways 
that are impossible for us, because we lack the relevant senses. For example, 
many animals, including at least one species of dolphin (the Guiana dolphin, 
Sotalia guianensis), possess electroreceptors that register electric !elds.15 It is 
likely that, in at least some of these species, this sense will have accompanying 
conscious experiences, and there may be a distinctive feeling associated with 
it going wrong. Perhaps, for Guiana dolphins, there is a feeling of ‘unpleasant 
disorientation of one’s electroreceptors’ that is very diﬀerent from any human 
feeling.
In short, we should expect there to be far more aﬀective experiences in 
Heaven and Earth than are dreamt of in our ordinary emotional vocabulary. 
Aﬀective space, built from the dimensions of valence and arousal, gives us a 
way of thinking more expansively about the possibilities.17
2.5 Three Views on the Nature of Valence
Russell, in introducing the circumplex model, described valence and arousal 
as features of the ‘actual structure of aﬀective experience’. In other words, they 
were posited to be, as philosophers like to say, phenomenological features. 
They capture part of what it feels like to experience an emotion or bodily 
sensation from the point of view of the person who feels it.
Your state of arousal has to do with whether you feel lethargic or energized. 
We can grasp arousal as a phenomenological feature by contrasting our 
ex peri ences of alarm, excitement, and astonishment (high arousal) with our 
experiences of tiredness, boredom, and relaxation (low arousal), reﬂecting on 
the key diﬀerence in the way the two groups of states feel. Meanwhile, the 
valence of an experience concerns whether it feels bad or feels good. Think 
about what states such as frustration, annoyance, anxiety, anger, fear, alarm, 
depression, sadness, and boredom all have in common: they feel bad. Think 
about what states such as joy, excitement, delight, pleasure, contentment, and 
serenity all have in common: they feel good.
15 Czech- Damal et al. (2011).
17 The value of ‘valence’ for conceptualizing variation across animals is also a theme of Birch et al. 
(2020b). Eliza Bliss- Moreau (2017) has made a similar point from within the theoretical perspective 
of constructionism about emotions. The aﬀective space does not imply constructionism, or vice versa, 
even though James A. Russell, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and their collaborators (including Bliss- Moreau) 
have defended both ideas, o6en in the same articles and books. See Birch (in press) for a detailed dis-
cussion of constructionism.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
