TH( PQ-CA0 /U1( A.C B(.T,(.)( 
M68
‘democratic and inclusive debate about the proportionality of precautions is 
justiﬁed’. I hope it is clear that these are very diﬀerent approaches, even 
though both could be called ‘precautionary’.
A message of §10.2 was that sentience candidature begins early in human 
development, but ‘early’ was proposed to mean approximately 12 weeks, not 
22 days. Neural tube closure is clearly insuJcient for the formation of the 
mechanisms that, even on the least cognitively demanding of the existing 
credible theories, suJce for sentience. An embryo in which the neural tube 
has just closed still has no brainstem, no superior colliculus, no periaque-
ductal gray, no discernible whole- system stress responses or nociceptive 
responses. The evidential threshold for sentience candidature is not met. If 
we accept this reasoning for fetuses, brain- dead adult humans, and so on, 
consistency requires we also accept it for in vitro embryos.
The upshot is that, if sentience candidature were to be taken as the funda-
mental criterion for the legal time limit on human embryo research, then that 
legal time limit could be liberalized very signiﬁcantly indeed, to a point far 
past the limits of current technology.
The ‘if  ’ is crucial, however. I am not proposing this liberalization, because 
I take it to be very likely that such a move would produce signiﬁcant public 
concern, especially from religious groups whose main interest is in protecting 
what they see as the sanctity of all human life. There is no overlapping con-
sensus, at present, around liberalization. Nor should we try to creep towards 
this liberalization by tiny increments, in an attempt to stay under the radar of 
the general public and avoid serious public debate about the acceptability of 
the long- run destination. Considerations regarding the sanctity of all human 
life, sentient or not, are part of the zone of reasonable disagreement, and they 
should be represented and aired in democratic, inclusive processes for 
decision- making. But they are not considerations to do with sentience. If the 
14- day rule or an even tighter legal limit can be justiﬁed, then the justiﬁcation 
must appeal to grounds that are not sentience- related. So, rather than propos-
ing a liberalization of the 14- day rule, what I propose instead is an inclusive 
debate in which reasons against that liberalization are given a fair hearing.
Proposal 11. Sentience and the 14- day rule. If the main goal of setting a 
legal time limit on human embryo research were that of prohibiting 
research on human sentience candidates, a signiﬁcant liberalization of the 
current 14- day rule would still be proportionate to that goal. However, the 
issue raises deep value conﬂicts that have little to do with sentience.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
