)34 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
together with the highly conserved nature of the relevant midbrain mechanisms 
across the vertebrates.
Panksepp and Merker were not wholly in agreement on these questions. 
Panksepp remained steadfastly agnostic on the question of sentience in 
 ﬁshes.7 This is surprising at ﬁrst glance, since ﬁshes possess the integrative 
midbrain structure he took to be so important in mammals: the periaque-
ductal gray (PAG). There is, moreover, evidence that the PAG in ﬁshes is 
‘convergent in both its functional and structural organization to the PAG of 
mammals’.8 For Panksepp, however, information about brain anatomy 
needed supplementation with evidence directly showing coordinated behav-
ioural responses corresponding to his seven basic emotions, evoked by elec-
trically stimulating the relevant brain regions, and this work has never been 
done in ﬁshes.
Merker, by contrast, has explicitly argued that the mechanisms involved in 
sentience were universal vertebrate mechanisms that evolved ‘at the very out-
set of the vertebrate lineage’.9 The point of divergence is that Merker does not 
consider Panksepp’s seven basic emotions to be necessary for sentience, and 
so is prepared to attribute sentience without evidence of these speciﬁc cir-
cuits. What Merker requires is evidence of a core behavioural control unit that 
constructs an integrated model of the whole animal and the environment, 
enabling :exible control of whole- animal behaviour in service of biological 
needs.
It is clear that ﬁshes have all the relevant brain regions (the brainstem, 
hypothalamus, optic tectum, and basal ganglia). In fact, these regions are so 
ancient that versions of them exist in lampreys, members of the most basal 
group of vertebrates (the jawless ﬁsh, or cyclostomes).; There is room for 
doubt, however, about whether these brain regions perform the same func-
tions right across the ﬁshes, a group encompassing over 30,000 known 
species.9 Behavioural evidence from teleost ﬁshes (infraclass Teleostei; in 
practice much of the experimental work has involved rainbow trout, goldﬁsh, 
and zebraﬁsh) indicates capacities for centralized, integrative decision- making. 
7 Panksepp (2016).
8 Kittelberger et al. (2006, p. 71).
9 Merker (2007, p. 3).
; See Janvier (2010) on the phylogeny of the vertebrates. See de Arriba and Pombal (2007) on the 
midbrain in lampreys, and see Grillner et al. (2013) and Wullimann (2011) on the basal ganglia. See 
Feinberg and Mallatt (2016); Ginsburg and Jablonka (2019); Godfrey- Smith (2020a); and Veit (2023) 
for possible evolutionary histories linking consciousness to the Cambrian explosion. Such discussions 
are, inevitably, quite speculative, given our uncertainty about the nature of consciousness, as reviewed 
in Part I. The evolutionary story will be very diﬀerent depending on whether a cortex- centric or 
midbrain- centric theory is correct (for discussion see Birch 2020c, 2021b).
9 Spelman (2012).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
