()E L,3/40(E. ,;LE 
77P
that regulates arousal and leads to sleep- wake cycles and a PAG receiving 
projections from cortical areas, then, no matter how small it is, it should be 
regarded as a sentience candidate. There would be at least one view within the 
zone of reasonable disagreement (namely a midbrain- centric view along the 
lines of Panksepp, Merker, and Solms) on which such a system would plausibly 
meet the basic system requirements for sentience. The outward signs of 
regulated arousal and sleep- wake cycles would be indicators that the conditions 
Panksepp, Merker, and Solms regard as suIcient for sentience may well be in 
place. The suIcient conditions of other theories might or might not be met, 
depending on the details. But there would be a realistic possibility of sentience, 
and it would be irresponsible to ignore that possibility.
We should add a caveat in the interests of future- prooﬁng. Strictly speak-
ing, what is required is a functioning biological brainstem or an artiﬁcial 
system that performs the key sentience- relevant functions of the midbrain: 
registering and prioritizing homeostatic needs, coordinating responses to 
those needs, regulating arousal, and supporting sleep- wake cycles. It could be 
that, in the distant future, artiﬁcial brainstems will be created to allow people 
to recover from currently irrecoverable brain injuries. Such a person would 
be a sentience candidate, despite lacking a biological brainstem. This is a long 
way oﬀ, but what may be much closer is the possibility of a small- scale func-
tional equivalent that is able to regulate the activity of an organoid in the 
same way a brainstem would. Even in the absence of a biological brainstem, 
we should be wary of the risks posed by attempts to use artiﬁcial brainstem- 
like systems to regulate and coordinate cortical activity in organoids.
I will call this proposal the ‘brainstem rule’:
Proposal 12. Brainstem rule. If a neural organoid develops or innervates a 
functioning brainstem (including the midbrain) that regulates arousal and 
leads to sleep- wake cycles, then it is a sentience candidate. An artiﬁcial 
functional equivalent of a brainstem would also suIce.
This is proposed as a suﬃcient condition for sentience candidature. To be clear, 
it is not proposed as a suIcient condition for sentience (since the Panksepp/
Merker/Solms view is a realistic possibility, not a certainty), nor is it proposed 
as a necessary condition for sentience candidature. The idea is that, when the 
condition is satisﬁed, we are in a situation in which we are no longer entitled 
to any kind of moral certainty that sentience is absent (in contrast to the case 
of brain death) and so should start considering precautions. The proposal 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
