./,2C1,: 1-2 2?270./0 /2W P.C1U72 
2(H
the maze and uses this as a guide to which branch to select at the fork, either 
opting for the branch with the matching colour/odour (when matching to 
sample is what leads to reward) or the branch with a non- matching colour/
odour (when non- matching leads to reward).
While these experiments indicate that honeybees and bumblebees have 
working memory, the inference from working memory to conscious experi-
ence is contested. In humans, the contents of working memory are not always 
experienced. If I commit a string of symbols to working memory, wait a few 
seconds, and retrieve it, there is a period in between commitment and 
retrieval in which I am not experiencing the string of symbols. It is more 
plausible that a content must be consciously experienced at the point of enter-
ing working memory and at the point of being retrieved— perhaps one func-
tion of conscious perception is to control the gates of working memory. This 
idea is sometimes associated with the global workspace theory of conscious-
ness. That said, even the idea of consciousness controlling the gates of work-
ing memory can be questioned. There is some evidence, from humans, that 
subliminal cues (i.e. cues that were never consciously seen) can be held in 
working memory.21 Yet continuing debate about the connection between con-
sciousness and working memory does not prevent evidence of working mem-
ory from raising the probability of sentience, especially against a background 
of substantial neural analogies (as stressed by Barron and Klein), poten-
tially raising the probability to the level of a realistic possibility it would be 
 irresponsible to ignore.
A related line of evidence concerns forms of associative learning linked 
tentatively to conscious perception in humans. Recall the example of trace 
conditioning, where the subject learns a temporal relationship between a CS 
and a US. For example, a human subject may hear a tone that predicts a puﬀ 
of air aimed at the eye a second later— and must learn to blink at just the right 
moment to block the air puﬀ.22 Until recently, conditioning across temporal 
gaps had only been shown in bees and Drosophila for olfactory stimuli. In 
2022, Dhruv Grover and colleagues demonstrated a form of visual trace con-
ditioning in Drosophila. Moreover, the researchers found trace conditioning 
and delay conditioning (with no temporal gap between CS and US) involved 
diﬀerent neural mechanisms, and that the trace conditioning mechanism was 
disrupted by a distracting stimulus between CS and US, suggesting the 
21 Soto et al. (2011).
22 Clark and Squire (1998); Clark et al. (2002).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
