)4) 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
ceph alo pod molluscs and decapod crustaceans.31 A substantial part of the 
work was designing a framework that could allow a fair and transparent 
assessment of whether the evidence was suﬃcient to justify including these 
taxa within the scope of the new law. That had to be done before we could 
even turn to the main task of synthesizing the existing evidence.
12.4 The Institute of Medical Ethics (IME) Criteria
Anyone faced with designing such a framework faces a dilemma. If you com-
mit to a speciﬁc theory of the functional proﬁle and neural basis of sentience, 
the result will be controversial, since all such theories are subject to reasonable 
disagreement. In the presence of reasonable disagreement, it would be very 
questionable to set policy on the assumption that the favoured theory of a 
small group of advisers happens to be true.
And yet, if you refuse to commit to a detailed theory, and instead rely on 
theory- neutral lists of criteria, a diﬀerent set of problems looms. One problem 
is that your criteria are still likely to represent an implicit partial theory, and 
this implicit partial theory may also be subject to reasonable disagreement. A 
second is that your criteria are likely to leave room for interpretation— and, 
without a theory capable of pinning down one precise interpretation, people 
will interpret the criteria in line with their own theoretical sympathies and 
prior views about the distribution of sentience.
Our framework is a serious attempt to grapple with that dilemma, within 
the constraints of a particular policy application in a speciﬁc time and place. 
We wanted to avoid both sets of pitfalls: those associated with overcommit-
ting to a speciﬁc theory, and those associated with a loosely worded set of 
theory- free criteria. We wanted to steer a course between the whirlpool and 
the rock.
As our starting point, we turned to the list of seven criteria drawn up by a 
working party of the Institute for Medical Ethics in 1991 (Box 12.1).32 I will 
call these the IME criteria. These criteria have been in:uential on subsequent 
animal welfare policy. For example, they helped shape the views of the UK’s 
Animal Procedures Committee concerning cephalopods, leading to the pro-
tection of Octopus vulgaris in science, and they were applied in 2005 in the 
EFSA report that shaped the 2010 EU directive in science. Indeed, the general 
approach of assessing evidence of sentience using lists of neurological, 
31 Birch et al. (2021).
32 Smith and Boyd (1991).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
