MNL 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
justice to the moral complexity of the issues, an assembly must give appropri-
ate weight to the voices of those who have a direct stake in the matter. One 
option, though not the only one, would be an assembly with two parts of 
equal size: a random sample of women and a random sample of the whole 
population. Those without a direct stake would still have a voice, but the 
voices of women would receive greater weight.
Proposal 10. Fetal pain relief (in the context of abortion). Clinicians need 
to communicate uncertainty about fetal sentience honestly to patients. In 
some cases, fetal pain relief may be appropriate. Deliberative processes for 
setting clinical norms must give appropriate weight to the voices of women.
10.6 Human Embryos and the 14-Day Rule
In the late 1970s and early 1980s— a few years before the neonatal pain 
controversy— both the US and UK governments established committees to 
advise on a controversy concerning the very beginning of human develop-
ment. In vitro fertilization (IVF) technology had made it possible to cultivate 
human embryos in the lab. As an inevitable part of the process, not all would 
be implanted into a mother. Could those embryos be used for research? And 
what about embryos created speciﬁcally for research? The beneﬁts of using 
human embryos for studying the early stages of human development are 
clear, but many have strong ethical qualms about this type of research.
Committees on both sides of the Atlantic converged on a rule that, as I 
write around forty years later, is still in force: the 14- day rule. The UK’s 
committee— led by the moral philosopher Mary Warnock and known as the 
‘Warnock Committee’—proposed that:
Legislation should provide that research may be carried out on any embryo 
resulting from in vitro fertilisation, whatever its provenance, up to the end 
of the 14th day afer fertilisation, but subject to all other restrictions as may 
be imposed by the licensing body.54
Why 14 days? The main reasons given did not concern sentience. Moreover, 
the two committees oﬀered diﬀerent reasons. The US committee cited 
54 Committee of Inquiry into Human Fertilisation and Embryology (1984, §11.30).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
