777 
4E;,3L ­,234­/50
states. The behaviour may be involuntary much of the time, but it is behav-
iour nonetheless. Sleep- wake cycles are also present, marking a clear distinc-
tion with coma. Meanwhile, in the case of non- human animals, the most 
compelling and widely accepted markers of sentience again tend to be behav-
ioural. For example, if an animal learns to self- administer anaesthetics or 
analgesics (such as opioids) in response to injury, that is some evidence that it 
is having an aversive experience (Chapters 12–14).
Organoids present a very diﬀerent kind of challenge. None of these behav-
ioural markers of sentience are likely to be present in a typical neural orga-
noid, because organoids are typically cut oﬀ from the sources of sensory 
input and motor output that are available to a complete and developed organ-
ism, and I assume this is likely to remain typical in the near- term future.
This could turn out to be an incorrect assumption. Some future organoids, 
even in the near term, may well have sources of sensory input and motor out-
put. For example, a recent study showed that under the right conditions a 
cortical organoid can spontaneously develop optic vesicles— the develop-
mental precursors to eyes— and it is not yet known how far this process could 
go, as the technology develops.1J Another study allowed organoids to develop 
in culture for a year, placed near to a spinal cord and muscle tissue taken from 
a mouse. The organoids ‘were able to innervate mouse spinal cord’ and ‘evoke 
contractions of adjacent muscle’.11
On this evidence, a time when organoid preparations can be joined up to 
both muscle outputs and sensory inputs is not far oﬀ. At that point, public 
concern about the research may grow. At the same time, using behavioural 
criteria to assess the likelihood of sentience may also become more feasible, 
providing a new way in which public concern could be exacerbated or at least 
slightly eased, depending on the results. Negative results would still require 
very cautious interpretation, because a failure to display sentience- related 
behaviours could easily reﬂect a failure of coordinated muscle control and a 
very limited behavioural repertoire rather than a lack of sentience.
Sentience, then, may be both more likely and easier to attribute when a 
neural organoid is joined up to other tissues, be they themselves organoids or 
taken from animals. But let us focus for now on the case of a ‘pure’ neural 
organoid, disconnected from any other tissues and any sources of sensory 
input or motor output. This is the type of case that presents the deepest puz-
zle. If the system is sentient at all, then it is what Tim Bayne, Anil Seth, and 
1J Gabriel et al. (2021).
11 Giandomenico et al. (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
