Cristina Lafont has developed a subtler and deeper concern about defer-
ence. To explain the criticism, let us introduce the concept of ‘uncompre-
hending deference’. A norm of uncomprehending deference exists in a society 
whenever ordinary citizens are expected to defer to the decisions of some 
subset of the population without understanding or accepting the reasons for 
those decisions. Lafont suggests (and I agree) that norms of uncomprehend-
ing deference are inimical to democracy. This is easy to see when we are talk-
ing about deference to an elite group of technocrats or oligarchs. Lafont’s 
move is to argue that this problem remains, in a less obvious form, when the 
subset is a citizens’ panel. The idea behind such a panel is that those outside 
the panel ought to defer not to experts but to their ‘better selves’—to the deci-
sions of a statistically representative group of ordinary people who have been 
properly informed and given time to deliberate. But deferring to your better 
self is still a form of uncomprehending deference. If you yourself, as a citizen 
outside the panel, have not received the same information and have not been 
part of the deliberation, you will not understand or accept the reasons that 
led to the decision.:B
Suppose, to use one of Lafont’s examples, a panel is tasked with evaluating 
a proposal for a radical new law mandating veganism. They learn the relevant 
facts, listen to the arguments, and come to be convinced of the need for such 
a law, even though the wider public and its elected representatives are far 
from convinced. What now? We are faced with two bad options. We either 
force the wider public to defer to the panel, which is far from democratic, or 
else we treat the output of the citizens’ panel as an input to a second demo-
cratic process (either a debate by an elected assembly or a referendum) and 
merely encourage deference to the recommendations of the panel, in which 
case we are being unrealistic. In a referendum, people would not defer to their 
‘better selves’ on a question at the core of their way of life, but would vote in 
accordance with their actual opinions. In an elected assembly, meanwhile, 
politicians would not defer to this ‘better public’ but would respond to the 
views of actual voters.
Moreover, there is no reason to think that the general population or its 
elected representatives even ought to defer to the panel, setting aside the ques-
tion of whether they would. If we say they ought to defer, we are saying that 
the secondary mechanism ought to be a mere rubber- stamping exercise in 
which the panel’s recommendation ought to be unanimously acclaimed. But 
the panel’s recommendation may have been the result of intense debate in 
:B Lafont (2020). Lafont uses the term ‘blind deference’, but I prefer ‘uncomprehending deference’.
OBM,?TIO(4 TO ?ITIN,(4’ 1A(,24 
547
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
