%HE ()N+(,)-+ .N/ %HE -N()N+(,)-+: F,/EG 2E++)N+ 
4H
5.3 The Conscious and the Unconscious: Wider Lessons
The blindsight literature is just one part of contemporary consciousness 
 science, but it crystallizes some persistent sources of disagreement that can be 
found right across the ﬁeld. The basic methodological strategy exempliﬁed by 
blindsight research— ﬁnd a way of dissociating conscious from unconscious 
perception, then study the neural and functional diﬀerences between the two 
dissociated mechanisms— is used throughout the discipline and faces some 
very general challenges.
One is a problem that arises from reliance on any kind of voluntary 
report, verbal or non- verbal: the criterion problem.1; A person asked to 
report their experiences, but struggling to distinguish a signal from noise, 
will have an implicit criterion for reporting a stimulus as seen rather than 
unseen. This criterion will balance the risk of false positives against the 
risk of false negatives, erring on one side or the other. Some people have 
more conservative reporting criteria than others: that is, some people 
place greater weight on avoiding false positives and are more reluctant to 
report a very faint stimulus as seen. When a stimulus is reported as unseen, 
it may be that it did not register in their conscious experience at all. But it 
may also be that it did register subtly but was not reported because it fell 
short of a conservative reporting criterion.
One possible way around this problem is to avoid voluntary reports by 
instead asking subjects to bet on how well they performed in a forced- choice 
task: ‘post- decision wagering’.15 Wagering can reveal dissociations between a 
subject’s task performance and their ability to monitor their task per form-
ance, a form of metacognition: thinking about one’s own cognitive processes. 
GY, for example, is strikingly poor at betting on his success or failure at dis-
criminating stimuli in the blind ﬁeld, relative to the normal ﬁeld.16 When the 
stimulus is presented in the normal ﬁeld, he can bet skilfully on his own task 
performance, but when the stimulus is presented in the blind ﬁeld, his wagers 
deteriorate into random guesses. Yet a contentious theoretical assumption is 
needed to interpret this pattern as evidence that blindsight is unconscious: 
the assumption that consciousness reliably brings with it the ability to moni-
tor one’s own performance in discrimination tasks. This will be readily 
accepted by those who already posit a robust link between consciousness and 
1; Eriksen (1960); Irvine (2012); Merikle et al. (2001); Michel (2019); Peters and Lau (2015); 
Peters et al. (2016, 2017).
15 Persaud (2009).
16 Persaud et al. (2007).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
