(A-5 ;A5AG);)5. A50 ./) ‘A116;) 1)5.-)5.’ (2-54-(+) 
%K%
Patients in VS are traditionally believed to lack any ability to experience 
the environment, internal or external, but complete certainty that primal 
sensations are absent is impossible to know. [. . .] Careful observation of 
pain- related behaviours (grimacing, moaning, groaning etc) provides the 
mainstay of monitoring and the presence of these features should be 
assumed to indicate discomfort rather than just re7ex or spontaneous 
movement or behaviour, at least until there is clear evidence to the 
contrary.29
The ‘at least until’ caveat suggests the 8nal advice may be a compromise 
between the sceptical view expressed by the 1994 task force and the precau-
tionary alternative. As I see it, such caveats are unhelpful in the absence of 
any 8rm grip on what might constitute ‘clear evidence’ that a pain- related 
behaviour is not accompanied by any experience. Elsewhere, the guidelines 
state that ‘irrespective of their cognitive capacity, patients in PDOC are 
 entitled to dignity and respect, and any signs that are suggestive of distress or 
su!ering should be assumed to be such’24 and that ‘all patients should be 
monitored for signs and symptoms of pain and should have pain managed 
appropriately’.2B
Clinical best practice therefore seems to be moving with good reason 
towards an idea we can call the ‘assume sentient’ principle (speci8c version, 
since I will shortly generalize it):
Proposal 1. Assume sentient (speciﬁc). Any signs that would be interpreted 
as signs of pain or distress in a conscious patient should still be so 
interpreted in a patient with any disorder of consciousness, and pain relief 
administered. This treatment should not be reserved for a subset of 
patients, e.g. those diagnosed as minimally conscious.
This principle— applied without exceptions or caveats— is in keeping with 
the precautionary attitude towards the edge of sentience advocated in this 
book. And while it is o!ered here as a proposal, I think it very likely that an 
inclusive and democratic process tasked with considering proposals would 
consider it a proportionate response to the risk.
29 Royal College of Physicians (2020, p. 92).
24 Royal College of Physicians (2020, p. 155).
2B Royal College of Physicians (2020, annex 3a, p. 4).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
