300E00/42 0E4(/E46E 6345/53(;,E /4 4E;,3L ­,234­/50 
778
This pattern of increasingly strong and frequent bursts of activity, with less 
predictable intervals, is also seen in the EEGs of preterm infants. In an eye- 
catching result, Trujillo and colleagues showed that a regression model pre-
dicting a neonate’s developmental age from key features of their EEG 
recording, and trained only on data from preterm infants, could also judge 
the developmental age of organoids older than 25 weeks with above- chance 
accuracy, with moderate correlation between the predicted and actual ages.
The result must be carefully interpreted. This does not show that the orga-
noids were in any sense equivalent to the brains of preterm infants. It is 
important to note, ﬁrst of all, that these cortical organoids were not brains at 
all. We should take care to avoid terms such as ‘mini- brain’ for systems like 
these. The organoids were formed of cortical tissue representative of one par-
ticularly important brain region, the neocortex. The organoids were vastly 
smaller than an infant brain, and still lacked a brainstem and vascularization. 
Nor do the results show that the electrophysiological activity was the same or 
indistinguishable in the two cases. The regression model aimed to exploit the 
similarities that existed, not quantify the degree of similarity. The model 
identiﬁed enough similarities to inform above- chance predictions of develop-
mental age, but this is compatible with substantial diﬀerences.
Nonetheless, the result was, to me, a wake- up call: a jolt out of compla-
cency about the potential ethical implications of this research. Neural orga-
noids develop, they are sometimes allowed to develop for a long time, and 
they develop in ways that show broad electrophysiological similarities to the 
developing human brain.
11.4 Assessing Sentience Candidature in Neural Organoids
We cannot conﬁdently rule out the possibility that suIciently sophisticated 
organoids will soon be sentient, and we can expect the science to continue 
to develop extremely rapidly. So, we need to have a discussion now about 
what sort of warning signs might suIce to regard an organoid as a sentience 
candidate.
Here we run into a serious problem. In people with prolonged disorders of 
consciousness, some behaviour remains, despite the tendency to describe 
patients as ‘unresponsive’, and that behaviour informs diagnosis and the 
design of precautions (Chapter 9). As we have seen, clinicians in the UK are 
already advised to respond to outward signs of pain, distress, anxiety, and 
depression on the precautionary assumption that they really do indicate those 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
