%KE 
()O(+) ,-./ 0-1O20)21 O3 4O514-O615)11
Reading testimony like this, it would be comforting to tell ourselves that the 
patients were not in fact capable of experiencing su!ering, and that the rela-
tives’ fears about CANH withdrawal were unfounded. The problem is, we 
cannot hide behind false certainties. None of us can honestly provide our-
selves or these interviewees with any such reassurance. For one thing, CANH 
withdrawal is legally permitted in the UK for patients who are diagnosed as 
minimally conscious, if it is deemed by the decision- making team to be in 
their best interests— and everyone agrees that these patients are capable of 
su!ering. But reassurance is not possible even in those cases that meet the 
traditional criteria for the PVS, due to the realistic possibility of covert 
valenced experience.
To describe this situation as problematic or troubling would be too weak. 
Relatives oAen express the view that, even if the patient would clearly want to 
be allowed to die, to allow them to die in that way is too much to contemplate, 
given our inability to rule out the possibility that they can experience su!er-
ing. This leads to many patients being kept alive inde8nitely, contrary to what 
those close to them consider to be in their best interests.
Withdrawal of nutrition and hydration would be regarded as an inhumane 
method of ending the life of any other sentient animal. It is permitted only for 
humans. Can the potential for su!ering be adequately managed? The RCP 
clinical guidance rightly emphasizes the need for hospital- based neuropallia-
tive care from specialists in sedation and analgesia. It notes that ‘any signs 
that are suggestive of distress and su!ering should be assumed to be such’,94 in 
line with the ‘assume sentient’ principle. However, the guidelines also caution 
that, ‘in the presence of profound cortical dysfunction, [sedatives] may be 
ine!ective even in exceptionally high doses’.9B
Clinicians are urged to titrate the level of sedation and analgesia to sup-
press symptoms to the best of their ability without creating a risk of 
overdosing— which would put them at risk of prosecution. The guidelines 
add that, due to this risk to the clinician, ‘it is quite common that medication 
is not increased quickly or high enough to control escalating signs of physio-
logical hyperactivity’.9C It would seem, in other words, that clinicians are 
impaired in their ability to err on the side of caution in controlling the risk of 
the patient su!ering because they need (understandably) to err on the side of 
caution in reducing their own personal exposure to the risk of punishment. 
This is a dreadful situation.
94 Royal College of Physicians (2020, p. 155).
9B Royal College of Physicians (2020, p. 156).
9C Royal College of Physicians (2020, p. 156).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
