H)F ,:N)G%.N% ,+ %HE NE)()G%EOJ 
5M?
emotional responses along with aﬀective states are much easier to obtain by 
stimulating subcortical brainstem sites.;C
He is referring here not to direct stimulation of the PAG itself, but to ex peri-
ments applying electrical stimulation to diﬀerent parts of the hypothalamus 
in rats.;1 The hypothalamus is a region just above the brainstem, strongly 
interconnected with the PAG. These experiments, as Panksepp interpreted 
them, showed that coordinated, whole- animal behaviour patterns could be 
triggered by localized electrical stimulation of this area. In a 1982 review, 
Panksepp argued that electrical stimulation could be used to induce distinctive 
‘rage’, ‘fear’, ‘expectancy’ (later rebranded as +EEP,N3), and ‘panic’ responses. 
In that early presentation of the theory, the hypothalamus was taken to be the 
neural basis of these feelings. In the more mature version, Panksepp shi7ed 
the focus to the PAG, arguing that all the relevant parts of the hypothalamus 
project directly to the PAG and that the latter was a better candidate for the 
relevant integrative centre.
A second key line of evidence was the observation that disruption to the 
PAG is absolutely devastating to animals. Panksepp cited lesion studies in the 
1940s on macaque monkeys and cats, which suggested that a very small 
amount of damage to the PAG can have drastic depressive eﬀects on mo tiv-
ation (e.g. motivation to feed), and that substantial damage to the PAG pro-
duces a state of unresponsiveness that, in a human, would most likely be 
diagnosed as a disorder of consciousness.;2
A distinct, third line of evidence is also important for understanding 
Panksepp’s deep resistance to cortex- centric theories: a study of play behav-
iour in rats in which the neocortex had been destroyed soon a7er birth. 
Panksepp and collaborators found diﬀerences in how the rats played, but 
their play behaviour appeared largely normal. ‘The basic impulse to play’, 
they wrote, ‘is subcortically organized since the behavior largely survives 
radical neodecortication’.;8 This prompted Panksepp to add N2.Y to the list of 
core aﬀective experiences.
Does this add up to a compelling case that conscious feelings, and not just 
coordinated behavioural patterns, have their basis in the midbrain? 
Unfortunately, the types of evidence that moved Panksepp are unlikely to 
sway an opponent, such as LeDoux, who favours a two- system model. Recall 
that, on the two- system model, the existence of a low- level system driving 
;C Panksepp (1998b, p. 572).
;1 Reviewed in Panksepp (1982).
;2 Bailey and Davis (1942, 1944).
;8 Panksepp et al. (1994, p. 440).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
