30I 
AGAI()T C,-./AC0(C1
In 2014, OpenWorm installed an early attempt at emulation in a Lego 
robot. The robot used sonar sensors to detect nearby objects, triggering the 
arti2cial sensory neurons that, in a real worm, respond to tactile stimulation. 
The arti2cial motor neurons, instead of mapping to muscles, mapped to elec-
tric motors. Without having been intentionally programmed to display any 
particular behaviour, the robot started behaving in ways that, super2cially at 
least, resembled C. elegans behaviour: ‘stimulation of the nose stopped for-
ward motion. Touching the anterior and posterior touch sensors made the 
robot move forward and back accordingly. Stimulating the food sensor made 
the robot move forward.’36
I have been a fan of OpenWorm ever since, yet the emulation of C. elegans 
behaviour I thought might soon become available has not materialized. One 
reason is funding: it is impossible to tell where the work would be now, had it 
received millions of dollars of investment. But another, deeper reason is that 
the connectome does not give us the whole story about the functioning of the 
nervous system. Perhaps most obviously, it does not tell us the synaptic 
weights: the degree of in5uence of one neuron’s 2ring over that of another. It 
also does not tell us how these weights can be modi2ed by experience— how 
the system can learn. More fundamentally, there is a lot that neurons do 
beyond simply 2ring, and indeed the neuroscience of C.  elegans is a rich 
source of information about what else a biological neuron can do.
For example, C. elegans is able to steer towards the source of an attractive 
odour or away from an aversive odour. This behaviour relies on processing 
within a single interneuron. Part of the neuron’s axon keeps track of where 
the head is located as it sweeps from side to side, while another part of the 
axon keeps track of the intensity of the odour, and these two pieces of infor-
mation are integrated inside the neuron to regulate steering. The internal 
spatial organization of the axon, plus its spatial relationships to sensory and 
motor neurons, are all part of the story of how it can do this job.37 A full emu-
lation of C. elegans would have to go below the neuronal level to emulate the 
dynamics within neurons, which ofen seem to depend on the 2ner details of 
how neurons are arranged in space.39
Around the same time I 2rst learned about OpenWorm, I read Nick 
Bostrom’s Superintelligence (2014), in which the possibility of whole- brain 
emulation is discussed as one possible route to intelligence beyond human 
levels. One day, Bostrom suggested, humans may be able to emulate whole 
36 Fessenden (2014).
37 Ouellette et al. (2018).
39 Donato et al. (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
