32B 
T() RU,--()-. /R0,10/2)
A separate problem is that I am sceptical of the idea that there will ever be a 
‘deﬁnitive test’. This is partly because I suspect the zone of reasonable dis-
agree ment regarding theories of consciousness will always be wide (see 
Chapters 3 and 5). But it is also that, even when the goal is criteria for sen-
tience candidature, not sentience simpliciter, evidence of sentience never 
seems to take the form of a single decisive test, or smoking gun. We always 
ﬁnd ourselves piecing together a picture from many diﬀerent lines of evi-
dence. Given this, I think we will we will always be in the territory of the third 
proposal, faced with cases where we have some inconclusive reasons to 
believe the AI is sentient.
As it stands, however, the third proposal seems underspeciﬁed. The pro-
posal is that, if there is ‘some reason’ to think the system sentient, then it 
deserves the same legal protections as other sentient beings. But there are 
many jurisdictions in which sentient animals receive woefully inadequate 
legal protection. So if the principle is simply one of parity in the eyes of the 
law, that may just as easily involve levelling down as levelling up. For ex ample, 
in a jurisdiction in which lab rats receive no protection, some may argue: this 
AI’s claim to protection can be no stronger than a lab rat’s claim, and lab rats 
receive no legal protections, so neither should this AI. What we need is level-
ling up: laws strong enough to protect sentient beings against gratuitous suf-
fering, applied consistently to biological and artiﬁcial sentience candidates. 
But then the burden lies on us, as defenders of this idea, to say what such a 
law might say.
17.3 Will We Soon Need an AI Welfare Law?
What models can we draw upon, if we want to design good law in this area? 
Good examples of animal welfare law can serve as inspiration. We have two 
centuries of animal welfare law to draw upon. All of it imperfect, much of it 
seriously Cawed, but, for all that, a rich source of information about what 
might or might not work.
In Chapter 14, I proposed licensing schemes and codes of good practice for 
new attempts to farm sentience candidates. This proposal draws on elements 
of how animal experimentation and animal farming are regulated in the UK. 
The goal is to create a structure in which innovation in farming is possible, 
but only as long as companies subscribe to published, enforceable codes of 
practice that compel them to be appropriately humane towards the animals 
in their care. Cases of completely uncontrolled innovation, where innovation 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
