A-1, A. FBH45, 64 B26.F 
)CN
For each criterion, we used conﬁdence levels to communicate the 
strength of the evidence that the animals under discussion satisfy or fail 
the criterion, an approach to communicating uncertainty inspired by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.72 These conﬁdence levels 
take into account both the amount of evidence for a claim and the reliability 
and quality of the scientiﬁc work and were agreed through discussion 
among the authors.
We used the category of ‘very high conﬁdence’ only when we judged that 
the weight of scientiﬁc evidence leaves no room for reasonable doubt that a 
marker is present/absent. We used the category of ‘high conﬁdence’ in cases 
when we could see strong but not completely conclusive evidence of the 
marker being present/absent. We used the category of ‘medium conﬁdence’ 
in cases where we had some concerns about the reliability of the evidence. We 
used ‘low conﬁdence’ for cases where there is little evidence that an animal 
satisﬁes or fails the criterion, or where there is evidence of similar strength in 
both directions. We used ‘very low’ or ‘no conﬁdence’ when the evidence is 
either seriously inadequate or non- existent. A key point is that ‘low conﬁ-
dence’ that a marker is present does not mean that we think it is probably 
absent. What it means is that the evidence one way or the other is thin, low- 
quality, ﬁnely balanced, or a combination of these.
Our key ﬁndings took the form of conﬁdence levels for each criterion, for 
various groupings of decapod and cephalopod. Those ﬁndings are summarized 
in Tables 12.1 and 12.2, reproduced from the full report.
Example 1: Conditioned Place Avoidance in Octopuses
I will brie:y describe a few of the studies that provided relevant evidence. A 
2021 study by Robyn Crook tested for conditioned place avoidance in the 
pygmy octopus, Octopus bocki, testing our criterion 8b.73 Octopuses were 
given a choice of three chambers, marked by diﬀerent patterns on the walls. 
One chamber was paired with an acetic acid injection that the animals found 
aversive. Another was paired with administration of lidocaine (a local anaes-
thetic) to the aﬀected area. Animals that initially preferred the acid- paired 
chamber, prior to experiencing the noxious stimulus, learned to disfavour it, 
and to prefer the lidocaine- paired chamber. Moreover, the octopuses displayed 
a distinctive skin- scraping behaviour in response to the noxious stimulus that 
ceased afer the administration of lidocaine. Meanwhile, electrophysiological 
72 IPCC (2010).
73 Crook (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
