,-. 3,B2I BF ,-. ‘3.4,6.4/. 1/,’ 
)4N
not implemented. Representatives from the bioscience sector argued that 
protecting decapods would impose a signiﬁcant bureaucratic burden on 
researchers. This, however, is more a reason to improve the eﬃciency of the 
regulatory procedures (for all protected animals) than a reason to exclude 
decapods from their scope.29
When the UK began the process of leaving the EU, it committed to 
 withdrawing from the Lisbon Treaty, and the UK government declined to 
directly import the clause about animal sentience into UK law. Animal welfare 
organizations launched a campaign to gain legal recognition for animal 
sentience in the UK, and the UK responded by pledging to introduce new 
legislation to achieve this.3D This was the beginning of a long process that 
resulted in the Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act 2022, or ‘Sentience Act’.
The Sentience Act improved on the Lisbon Treaty by establishing a mech-
an ism to oversee compliance. UK animal welfare law generally works by cre-
ating mechanisms of accountability and oversight. For example, scientists, to 
obtain project licences for any procedures that might cause a level of pain 
equal to or greater than that caused by an injection from a hypodermic nee-
dle, must explain to Animal Welfare Ethical Review Boards why the harms 
imposed by their research are justiﬁed by the beneﬁts. Farmers must follow 
established codes of practice, with the possibility of being charged with vio-
lating a duty of care towards their animals if they ignore these codes. The 
Sentience Act extended this ‘oversight model’ to government policy- makers, 
putting them under a duty to pay ‘all due regard’ to the welfare of sentient 
animals when formulating policy and to consider the animal welfare impacts 
of their decisions. The Act created a statutory Animal Sentience Committee 
to monitor compliance with that duty.
This was a positive step. Yet once you create a mechanism to monitor com-
pliance with a duty, the question of the scope of that duty becomes un avoid-
able. The Sentience Act, then, had to specify the scope of the duty. The ﬁrst 
draf of the Sentience Bill included all vertebrate animals, including ﬁshes, 
within its scope. But policy- makers, under pressure from campaign groups, 
wondered: should some invertebrates also be included?
To help decide that question, the UK government’s Department for the 
Environment, Food, and Rural Aﬀairs (Defra) commissioned a team led by 
me (together with Charlotte Burn, Alexandra Schnell, Andrew Crump, and 
Heather Browning) to produce a review of the evidence of sentience in 
29 Birch (2017a).
3D R. Mason (2017).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
