)-DDU.,)AT,.G U.)(/TA,.T0 ,. TH( A4-/T,-. )1,.,) 
MNK
Unfortunately, these answers evade the need for honest communication of 
uncertainty. That cannot be the way forward. The language of ‘realistic possi-
bility’ may be helpful here. Patients in the abortion clinic, if they ask ques-
tions like these, need to be informed accurately, and so should be told that 
there is a realistic possibility of fetal pain afer 12 weeks, that the whole ques-
tion is shrouded in signiﬁcant uncertainty, but that analgesics are generally 
considered to reduce the risks in the context of fetal surgery.
In 2022, the RCOG convened another working group to update its heavily 
criticized 2010 report. Thankfully, the language was signiﬁcantly toned down. 
The group nonetheless concluded that ‘evidence indicates that the possibility 
of pain perception before 28 weeks of gestation is unlikely’ and added that 
‘there is no basis for considering the administration of analgesia or anaesthe-
sia to a fetus before termination of pregnancy in the ﬁrst or second trimester 
to prevent fetal perception of pain’.5: Derbyshire and Bockmann’s 2020 art-
icle, arguing for just such a basis, was not cited or mentioned— Derbyshire 
was on the working party, yet his revised views were clearly given little con-
sideration. I do not think this uneasy situation can continue indeﬁnitely. At 
some point, professional bodies will have to confront the issue of how to 
communicate uncertainty, rather than clinging fast to the language of cer-
tainty in an area where it cannot be justiﬁed.
A second very diJcult issue concerns the procedures for setting clinical 
norms. Who should decide whether analgesia should be standard practice, 
only used when the patient asks for it, or discouraged? The question is not 
just one for experts, because it concerns what is proportionate to the risks of 
fetal pain. However, my proposal to entrust citizens’ panels with assessments 
of proportionality (see Part II) also faces a problem: this is a situation that 
around half the population can be sure they will never experience. Indeed, 
productive debates about abortion can be obstructed by men attempting to 
dominate discussion of the evaluative questions, even though the choice is 
one they will never themselves face.
I am very unsure how best to handle this. One way forward is to construct 
panels composed of women. Yet the 2016–2017 Irish citizens’ assembly that 
recommended a liberalization of abortion law in Ireland was gender- 
balanced, and its statistical representativeness may well have been crucial to 
its proposals being accepted by the wider population.5; A trade- oﬀ in institu-
tional design surfaces starkly in this context: to command conﬁdence in its 
recommendations, an assembly must represent the whole of society, but to do 
5: Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2022).
5; Palese (2018).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
