88 
A WA() A(ON, -./ /0,/
precautionary principle’. I doubt there is any such general truth. What I mean 
will probably become clearer when we reach Chapter 6.
This general idea has been around for a long time in discussions of sen-
tience (the history will be reviewed case by case in later chapters).!6 My 
framework, however, combines the thought that we need to err on the side of 
caution with another, equally important thought: it is not enough to simply 
advise people to ‘err on the side of caution’ and leave it there. Almost any 
action at all, from outrageously costly precautions to the tiniest gesture, can 
be described as ‘erring on the side of caution’. We need ways of choosing 
among possible precautions. As in other areas where precautionary thinking 
is important, the crucial concept we need is proportionality: our precautions 
should be proportionate to the identiﬁed risks.!7
I do not think proportionality reduces to a cost- beneﬁt calculation. It 
requires us to resolve deep value conﬂicts, conﬂicts that obstruct any attempt 
to quantify beneﬁts and costs in an uncontroversial common currency. 
Further down the line (in Chapters 7 and 8), I will give a pragmatic analysis 
of what it means to be proportionate, emphasizing that proportionate 
responses need to be permissible- in- principle, adequate, reasonably neces-
sary, and consistent (I call these the ‘PARC’ tests). I will then turn to the ques-
tion: what sort of procedures should we use, in a democratic society, to assess 
proportionality? My proposals will give a key role to citizens’ panels or 
assemblies, which attempt to bring ordinary members of the public into the 
discussion in an informed way in order to reach recommendations that reﬂect 
our shared values.
Because I think these decisions should be made by democratic, inclusive 
processes— and not by any individual expert— I think my own proposals 
about speciﬁc cases should be read as just that: proposals. They are not sup-
posed to be the ﬁnal word on any of these issues. I am not auditioning for the 
role of ‘sentience tsar’. It would be a mistake for any government to imple-
ment my proposals straight away, without discussion and debate. But I have 
given a lot of thought to what courses of action are plausibly proportionate to 
the challenges we currently face, and I am publishing my proposals in the 
hope of provoking debates I see as urgently needed. If I succeed in stimulat-
ing discussion, I can dare to hope the discussion may lead, via democratic 
and inclusive processes, to action.
!6 My own ﬁrst encounter with the idea was in a paper by R.GH.GBradshaw (1998).
!7 Colin Klein (2017), in a commentary on my work, urged me to think more about 
proportionality— and was right.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
