MNI 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
10.5 Communicating Uncertainty in the Abortion Clinic
Let us now return to the vexed issue of abortion. The message of §10.2 was 
that the question of fetal sentience is diﬀerent from the question of the right 
to access abortion, which hinges on bodily autonomy and/or fetal person-
hood. Recognition of fetuses as sentience candidates should not be used as a 
reason to ban abortion. But we also noted that the issues are not wholly unre-
lated, and it is time to revisit the relationship between them.
In high- income countries, 90 per cent of abortions are performed before 
129weeks, and the embryo or fetus is not yet a sentience candidate at this 
time, given the way we have deﬁned that term.4E The structures regarded as 
suJcient for sentience even by the least cognitively demanding credible 
pictures are not yet functional. But what about the 10 per cent of cases where 
the fetus is 12 weeks or over? Derbyshire and Bockmann admit that they 
disagree on the best way forward. One believes that the use of analgesia is a 
matter ‘for the clinical team and the pregnant woman’ and that there should 
be no general policy, while the other thinks analgesia should be ‘standard for 
abortions in the second trimester’.5F
I will limit myself to two reﬂections here: one about communication, and 
one about deliberative procedures. The question of how to introduce the pos-
sibility of fetal pain sensitively, without crossing the boundary into emotional 
manipulation of the patient, is a very diJcult one. The RCOG report of 2010 
gives a vision of how simple things might have been, and it tells us what doc-
tors would ideally like to be able to say to their patients. The report includes a 
section that aims to answer frequently asked questions about abortions before 
24 weeks. The suggested answers oﬀer unequivocal conﬁdence:51
Will the fetus/baby feel pain?
No, the fetus does not experience pain [ . . . .] Current research shows that the 
sensory structures are not developed or specialised enough to ex peri ence pain 
in a fetus less than 24 weeks.
Will the process hurt the baby?
No. To be hurt, you need to feel pain. Current research shows that the sensory 
structures are not developed or specialised enough for a fetus to experience 
pain less than 24 weeks.
4E Popinchalk and Sedgh (2019).
5F Derbyshire and Bockmann (2020, p. 5). They do not say which author is which, but one can guess.
51 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2010, p. 20).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
