)Q 
ET,-./ 012 3E4-5-61
the possibility of sentience in insects, organoids, and AI) Linzey’s view 
appears to imply that the conditions for rights are not satisﬁed.
Judaism shares with Christianity a belief in Genesis and ‘dominion’. But it 
also has the Talmud, a compilation of ancient teachings on the Torah that are 
regarded as sacred. The Talmud (Bava Metzia 32b–33a) contains a long and 
detailed debate about a line in Exodus that says ‘When you see the ass of your 
enemy lying under its burden and would refrain from raising it, you must 
nevertheless help raise it’ (Exodus 23:5). The debate concerns whether the 
duty to prevent animal suﬀering is a matter of rabbinic decree or, due to this 
line, a matter of scriptural law. Both sides agree there is indeed such a duty: 
they just disagree about its source.25 The Talmud leaves this matter unre-
solved. It also leaves open the question of what exactly the duty requires, and 
whether the duty is direct or (as on the orthodox Kantian view) indirect. The 
result, as with Christianity, is that many diﬀerent positions can be reconciled 
with scripture, ranging from robust defences of animal rights through to a 
Kant- style indirect duty view.
The Qur’an states, referring to camels and cattle, that ‘we have subjected 
these animals to you so that you may be grateful’ (Surrah Al- Hajj 22:36), a 
similar idea to dominion. Islam unambiguously permits the eating of animals 
of approved kinds, provided rules surrounding their slaughter and handling 
are met. At the same time, there is support in the Hadith for a compassionate 
attitude towards other animals. Asked if there is a reward for kindness shown 
towards other animals, Muhammad replies ‘a reward is given in connection 
with every living creature’, suggesting even acts of kindness towards plants may 
be rewarded (Riyad as- Salihin 126). Elsewhere Muhammad remarks that ‘the 
worst of shepherds are those who are ungentle’ (Mishkat al- Masabih 3688).2?
There is no denying that Abrahamic holy texts ofen make diﬃcult reading 
for those with sentientist sympathies. Yet the importance of compassion, and 
avoiding gratuitous suﬀering, is a common thread.
4.6 Indian Religions and Ahimsa
Indian perspectives on sentience share the Abrahamic emphasis on compassion 
but in some cases go much further. In 2023, I spent a week in Dharamsala, 
India, discussing animal sentience with Tibetan Buddhist monks. The concept 
25 Seidenberg (2006).
2? Rahman (2017) puts heavy emphasis on remarks like this, seeing in them a strong defence of 
compassion towards other animals.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
