members of the public supposed to comprehend all the relevant science and 
philosophy? I would have said the same myself in the past, but the panels on 
genome editing described earlier changed my view. I now think there are 
ways to overcome this design problem by carefully formulating the questions 
we pose to the panel.
Although ordinary citizens are not experts on complex scientiﬁc matters, 
they are experts on their own experiences, needs, priorities and values, a 
point powerfully made by W.JE.JB.JDu Bois in his defence of democracy and 
universal su;rage. When Mary, in Frank Jackson’s thought experiment, leaves 
her black and white room and encounters a red tomato for the ﬁrst time, she 
gains knowledge: knowledge of what it’s like to experience red.:D That point 
extends far beyond experiences of colours to encompass any type of 
 experience with a distinctive character, including experiences of the many 
varieties of su;ering and joy.:E In Du Bois’s words, ‘only the su;erer knows 
his su;erings’.:F Ordinary citizens have a huge amount of relevant knowledge 
about human experiences and their comparative value or disvalue. The 
knowledge is distributed across many heads, but it is there nonetheless. This 
is the knowledge a citizens’ panel aims to pool and draw upon.:G
This response, though, leads to new worries about representativeness: will 
the panel not inevitably lack knowledge of the su;erings and joys of beings 
on the edge of sentience? The ability of the panel to co- opt new members 
helps, but there will still be an element of indirectness and of inescapable 
ignorance. For example, even a close family member of a person with a dis-
order of consciousness does not know what it feels like to be that person. 
Note, however, that a panel of experts would face the same problem, so this is 
not a reason to exclude ordinary citizens from the discussion. It is just a rea-
son to make sure the discussion does involve people who are as close as any-
one can get to knowing what it feels like, such as people who have themselves 
recovered from disorders of consciousness.
These ideas will be developed further in the next chapter. We have not yet 
properly answered the challenge. For our imagined critic will say: yes, if the 
question concerns values, panels of members of the public are well placed to 
formulate answers. However, if the question concerns science, they are not: 
ordinary citizens without scientiﬁc training lack the competence needed to 
:D Jackson (1982). Although Jackson initially took it to support epiphenomenalism, the idea that 
experience gives us a special type of knowledge— knowledge of what it’s like to have the experience— is 
compatible with many di;erent views of the mind- body relationship. It does not imply that the new 
knowledge concerns non- physical facts (Carruthers 2000; Crane 2001, 2019; Papineau 2002).
:E Paul (2014).
:F Du Bois (1920/2005, §27).
:G This has become an important motif in epistemic arguments for democracy. See Goodin and 
Spiekermann (2018); Landemore (2013).
OBM,?TIO(4 TO ?ITIN,(4’ 1A(,24 
5K5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
