K4U7 ./L2,1.061.4/ P7.47.1.2, 
2EH
the prey behind a shutter for 90 seconds, before revealing it again.;6 If the 
prey item had changed during the waiting period, Portia was much less likely 
to attack, regardless of the nature of the ‘before’ and ‘afer’ prey items. The 
best explanation, Cross and Jackson argue, is that the spider has some mem-
ory of the ‘before’ item, and that its expectations are violated when it sees the 
prey has changed. Since the spider was observed positioning itself for an 
attack, it is natural to wonder whether the spider’s ‘expectation’ could be 
embodied rather than internally represented: perhaps it adopts an attack 
position sensitive to the prey initially seen, and later registers a mismatch 
between its attack position and its target. It would be well worth trying work-
ing memory paradigms in Portia of the type used in bees (radial arm mazes, 
Y- mazes).
Tarantulas (family Theraphosidae) are another intriguing case. Though 
seemingly neglected in laboratory research except as sources of silk,;7 they 
are widely kept as pets, leading to many anecdotal reports suggestive of sen-
tience. Kurt Sladky, a professor of zoological medicine, has written that taran-
tulas, in his experience,
react to noxious thermal stimuli similarly to mammals, birds, and reptiles. 
In addition, hypodermic needle insertion into the exoskeleton incites an 
immediate withdrawal reaction, followed by limb rubbing at the site of nee-
dle insertion. Opioid administration will attenuate responses to noxious 
stimuli in tarantulas, but the dosages required are relatively high.;B
Anecdotes are not enough for sentience candidature: we need either evidence 
of pain markers from controlled experiments and/or high- quality evidence of 
other kinds, such as the bee evidence reviewed earlier. But they can strengthen 
the case for regarding an animal as an investigation priority, especially when 
the welfare risks are high (as is the case for animals commonly kept as pets, 
yet excluded from animal welfare laws).
Are spiders sentience candidates? The evidence seems stronger than for 
gastropods, but weaker than the evidence for insects, decapods, and cephalo-
pods. For our exercise in pragmatic line- drawing, the crucial point is that it 
seems too thin to allow evidence- based discussions of proportionality. This is 
a frustrating situation: one that arises from a lack of evidence rather than 
from any reason to think the evidence, were we to look, would not be there. 
;6 Cross and Jackson (2014).
;7 Morelle (2009).
;B Sladky (2014). Thanks to Katharina Dornenzweig for pointers to relevant tarantula evidence.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
