30T-6104-TG-.E1T3-. V-E;/ 
)H
feeling’ or (in modern terminology) empathy. For Kant, we have a duty to 
cultivate morally good dispositions, and we violate this duty if we do things 
that erode dispositions ‘serviceable to morality’. This has come to be known 
as the ‘in dir ect duty’ view.
Some criticisms of Kant’s view are misplaced. Robert Nozick for example, 
suggested that the Kantian view would permit animal cruelty as long as the 
agent kept in mind a clear line between humans and animals, so that tortur-
ing animals did not in fact produce any ‘moral spillover’ in the form of cruelty 
towards humans.1A Kant would reply that, even if no actual spillover occurs, 
the agent has violated a duty to himself by failing to cultivate a sense of 
empathy.
Nonetheless, the view can be criticized on other grounds. Kant’s view 
makes our duties concerning animals dependent on contingent psychological 
facts about what does, or does not, erode our sense of empathy. If Kant’s psy-
chological assumptions were shown to be incorrect for at least some humans, 
those humans might have no duties concerning animals. Consider, for 
ex ample, people who are incapable of developing empathy, and who there-
fore cannot erode that capacity by torturing an animal. It appears that, for 
Kant, they violate no duty by doing so. It is fair to doubt a picture on which 
duties come and go with quirks of a person’s psychological constitution.1B
A related problem is that, in the modern world, many ways of mistreating 
animals involve long and indirect causal pathways that seem unlikely to erode 
a person’s sense of empathy in their face- to- face interactions. Imagine a CEO 
who, mindful of the need to save money, writes an email ordering his farmers 
to increase the stocking density of their chickens. This is far away from the 
sort of immediate animal cruelty Kant clearly had in mind. Suppose the CEO 
does not erode his sense of empathy in any way by sending the email. On 
Kant’s view, he has done nothing wrong, even if the welfare consequences are 
dire. It is fair to doubt a picture on which causal distance from the outcomes 
of your decisions carries this kind of moral signiﬁcance.
Carruthers defended an idiosyncratic version of the indirect duty view in 
his 1992 book The Animals Issue, emphasizing not the consequences of ani-
mal cruelty for our sense of empathy, but rather the way in which cruelty 
expresses bad character traits and oﬀends animal lovers, who have a ‘right to 
have their concerns respected and taken seriously’.1C This is a very weak 
1A Nozick (1974, p. 36).
1B A criticism pressed by Allen Wood in an exchange with Onora O’Neill (Wood and O’Neill 1998).
1C Carruthers (1992, p. 107).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
