T() 2)3)E7,T 6:73) /F F9,:T+/,73 /287,+R7T+/, 
6A
someone sympathetic to substrate sensitivity will doubt the reliability of 
introspective reports a4er the insertion of the implant. They will suspect that 
a loss of phenomenology is slipping under the radar of the subject’s intro-
spective mechanisms, which continue to receive the same informational 
inputs as before, leading to (mistaken) conﬁdence that nothing has changed.HH
These objections do not just lead me to have doubts about the chip test— 
they also lead to doubts about the standard way of framing the debate. The 
brain has functional organization at many diﬀerent levels of analysis, from the 
high- level connectivity of large brain regions right down to the functioning 
within individual neurons, with many levels in between. Marr’s three levels of 
analysis— the computational level, the algorithmic level, and the implementa-
tion levelHI—are a good starting point, but they subdivide into yet ﬁner levels, 
and in reality I think that even to talk of ‘levels’ is to impose a degree of artiﬁ-
cial discreteness on continuous variation in the scale of functional organiza-
tion.HK And to change the substrate (in any physically possible way) is to 
change many functional properties at smaller scales. Various views are then 
possible about how conscious experience and person- level cognitive pro-
cesses (such as introspection) relate to these small- scale functions.
It is reasonable to think functional organization at small scales probably 
matters— and to doubt the idea of AI sentience for this reason.HL It is im port-
ant, though, that we do not allow our doubts to become false certainties. 
When thinking about risk and precaution, it is crucial to also take seriously 
the opposite view: a view on which only large- scale features of the computa-
tional architecture— such as the presence or absence of a global workspace or 
perceptual reality monitoring— need to be recreated in an artiﬁcial system for 
sentience to also be recreated. I will call this view large- scale computational 
functionalism. The tenability of large- scale computational functionalism has 
wide- ranging implications for the edge of sentience, because it implies a need 
to take seriously the possibility of sentience in systems that implement a gen-
eral type of computation credibly linked to sentience in humans, even if the 
precise algorithms and the hardware implementation both di!er a great deal.
HH Udell and Schwitzgebel (2021). Chalmers’s ‘fading qualia’ thought experiment faces a related 
problem. Chalmers says it is implausible to suppose a subject would mistakenly think their phe -
nomen ology was unaltered by a partial change of substrate. A4er all, their brain is functioning just as 
well as before. But someone sympathetic to substrate sensitivity will not accept that preserving func-
tional organization at the neuronal level suﬃces for preserving functional organization at the person 
level. They will suspect the person’s capacity for introspection will become unreliable.
HI Marr (1982).
HK Potochnik and McGill (2012). Shevlin (2021) has discussed related issues under the heading of 
‘the speciﬁcity problem’.
HL See Aru et al. (in press); Godfrey- Smith (2016a); Seth (2021) for versions of such views.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
