Summary of the Framework  
and Proposals
Precautionary Framework
A sentient being (in the sense relevant to the present framework) is a system 
with the capacity to have valenced experiences, such as experiences of pain 
and pleasure.
A system S is a sentience candidate if there is an evidence base that (a) 
implies a realistic possibility of sentience in S that it would be irresponsible to 
ignore when making policy decisions that will aﬀect S, and (b) is rich enough 
to allow the identiﬁcation of welfare risks and the design and assessment of 
precautions.
A system S is an investigation priority if it falls short of the requirements for 
sentience candidature, yet (a) further investigation could plausibly lead to the 
recognition of S as a sentience candidate and (b) S is aﬀected by human activ-
ity in ways that may call for precautions if S were a sentience candidate.
Framework Principle 1. A duty to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering. We 
ought, at minimum, to avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering to sentient beings 
either intentionally or through recklessness/negligence. Suﬀering is not gra-
tuitous if it occurs in the course of a defensible activity despite proportionate 
attempts to prevent it. Suﬀering is gratuitous if the activity is indefensible or 
the precautions taken fall short of what is proportionate.
Framework Principle 2. Sentience candidature can warrant precautions. If S 
is a sentience candidate, then it is reckless/negligent to make decisions that 
create risks of suﬀering for S without considering the question of what pre-
cautions are proportionate to those risks. Reasonable disagreement about 
proportionality is to be expected, but we ought to reach a policy decision 
rather than leaving the matter unresolved indeﬁnitely.
Framework Principle 3. Assessments of proportionality should be informed, 
democratic, and inclusive. To reach decisions, we should use informed and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
