324 
T() RU,--()-. /R0,10/2)
In other words, notwithstanding all the di3culties involved in forecasting 
where the technology will go, I propose we try to develop approaches to regu-
lation that run ahead of where the technology is now, to mitigate the risk of 
being caught out by rapid technological change. I will call this idea the run- 
ahead principle:4
Proposal 25. The run- ahead principle. At any given time, measures to 
regulate the development of sentient AI should run ahead of what would 
be proportionate to the risks posed by current technology, considering 
also the risks posed by credible future trajectories.
The run- ahead principle leaves open the question of exactly how restrictive 
the measures we take now should be. Let’s turn to that question.
17.1 Metzinger’s Call for a Moratorium
The philosopher Thomas Metzinger worked between 2018 and 2020 as part 
of the European Commission’s ‘high- level expert group on AI’, a group tasked 
with producing ethical guidelines for the AI sector. He became frustrated that 
long- term risks were being overlooked, dismissed as ‘mere science ﬁction’. 
The Commission was not, it seems, in favour of the run- ahead principle.
One of the neglected risks that worried Metzinger was that of an ‘intelli-
gence explosion’, in which AI becomes vastly superior to humans in its cap-
abil ities, reaching a point where it has the power to end humanity if it so 
chooses. I will not discuss that risk here, because it has been much discussed 
already, and it is fundamentally a risk posed by artiﬁcial intelligence (sentient 
or not), and my concern here is with sentience. Of more direct concern to 
Metzinger, and more directly relevant to this book, was the risk of a ‘suﬀering 
explosion’ or ‘explosion of negative phenomenology’.5
In a suﬀering explosion, humans create, perhaps unintentionally, vast 
numbers of suﬀering sentient beings. We may, for example, create legions of 
artiﬁcial agents to serve human needs round the clock, even though they live 
joyless lives full of boredom, frustration, exhaustion, and pain. We may be 
completely oblivious to their sentience. But we might also regard our artiﬁcial 
4 Sebo and Long (2023) have defended a similar idea.
5 Metzinger (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
