),U?C0) ,F ?I)A B: CD,/0-E?AI( 0-U/ATI,( 
303
campaigns for animal welfare. However, if attributions of sentience to AI are 
mistaken, these campaigns might do harm overall, by distracting attention 
away from the welfare needs of sentient animals.
At the same time, we should expect more and more people to develop 
strong feelings about the individual AI systems in their own lives. If these AI 
companions are sentient, these feelings might be reciprocated. But if they are 
not, human lives could become increasingly absurd, as people become ever 
more devoted to non- sentient companions at the expense of their relation-
ships with real sentient beings.F All of this means we cannot simply ignore the 
question of what it takes for an AI system to be a sentience candidate. That 
debate is coming, whether we are ready or not.
15.2 Sources of Risk 1: Whole-Brain Emulation
I will come back to LLMs in the next chapter, but for now I want to pivot 
away from them to consider three other, relatively under- discussed pathways 
to arti2cial sentience. As I noted in Chapter 1, the Blake Lemoine controversy 
was not, in fact, my watershed moment. In 2014, there was an article in the 
Smithsonian Magazine called ‘We’ve put a worm’s mind in a Lego robot’s 
body’.G The article described an ambitious project called OpenWorm, the aim 
of which was to emulate the entire 302- neuron nervous system of hermaph-
roditic C. elegans in computer sofware.3H
To emulate, in computing, is to reproduce all the functionality of one sys-
tem within another system. For example, I can download sofware that emu-
lates a Nintendo GameBoy within a Windows PC. Emulation can take many 
forms. The speci2c goal of OpenWorm was to achieve neuron- by- neuron 
emulation, where the functionality of every single neuron is reproduced in 
sofware. And that still is the goal: the project began in 2011 is ongoing.33 The 
main reason for thinking the goal is a realistic one is that the complete map of 
all the synaptic connections in the brain of C. elegans— its ‘connectome’—has 
been known since the 1980s, and the map now includes the entire nervous 
system of both sexes.34
F Birch (2023c).
G Fessenden (2014).
3H C. elegans has two sexes: male and hermaphrodite. The term ‘hermaphrodite’, though oﬀensive 
when used to describe intersex humans, remains standard in biology for non- human cases (though I 
would favour changing this).
33 https://docs.openworm.org/fullhistory/.
34 Cook et al. (2019).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
