BJ 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
behavioural evidence tells us nothing about it. That could follow only if 
‘subjective/private’ implied ‘epiphenomenal’.
The epiphenomenalist picture is one that would, if true, hold bleak conse-
quences for our ability to resolve disputes at the edge of sentience. This is 
because it is a picture on which there is no explanatory connection between 
consciousness and any physical marker. There may still be markers that re li-
ably correlate with consciousness in the case of a healthy adult human, but 
those markers will not be causally explained by the presence of conscious-
ness.K This is bleak because, to make any progress in disputed cases, we need 
there to be an explanatory connection between consciousness and its mark-
ers. This is because we need to use the principle of inference to the best ex plan-
ation (or ‘IBE’) to infer consciousness from the markers in disputed cases.L
To elaborate on this point: if consciousness 5oats on top of a neural mech-
anism, so to speak, explaining nothing it does, then IBE will be unable to 
select between the hypothesis that consciousness is abolished by very small 
di!erences in the mechanism (e.g. the di!erences that exist between humans 
and chimpanzees) and the hypothesis that consciousness is preserved across 
those di!erences. The psychophysical laws connecting ineﬃcacious ex peri-
ences to brain states could apply only to humans, or only to primates, or only 
to mammals, and so on, without any consequence for our explanations of any 
set of physical (e.g. neural, behavioural, cognitive) markers. This leads nat ur-
al ly to the agnosticism espoused by Watson and earlier by T.  H.  Huxley, 
whereby, having seen the impossibility of using IBE to settle these questions, 
we give up on the idea of a science of consciousness.
This explains why I would like epiphenomenalism to be false, but the 
bleakness of a philosophical theory is not a reason to reject it. Luckily, I think 
we have good reasons for ﬁnding epiphenomenalism implausible. William 
James, in the The Principles of Psychology (1890/1918), gave an evolutionary 
argument for rejecting epiphenomenalism that still stands up well. James 
appeals to the adaptive complexity of valenced experience. James emphasized, 
in particular, the many grades of intensity that are possible in relation to 
valenced experiences such as pleasure, comfort, satiety, pain, nausea, thirst, 
and breathlessness. With occasional exceptions, the valence and intensity of 
our experiences are strikingly well aligned with the strength of our biological 
K I am setting aside here the possibility that conscious experiences might non- causally explain 
physical e!ects.
L On IBE, see Lipton (2004). Tye (2016) and Andrews (2020) have also emphasized the key role 
played by IBE in inferences to animal consciousness.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
