B0CO 2( 2HE E6-E 
%MM
the conclusion that there are no ethical limits on our treatment of birds. The 
fact that we are separated from birds by hundreds of millions of years of evo-
lution, leading to major diﬀerences of brain organization, is an obstacle to 
certainty regarding their sentience, and we should admit this. But it is no 
obstacle to the idea that humans sometimes treat birds in ways that are reck-
less, negligent, and liable to cause gratuitous suﬀering. There would be some-
thing very obviously wrong about boiling a bird alive, for example. These 
ideas do not require certainty about sentience, or even high probability. What 
they require is sentience candidature.
This, then, is my second proposed framework principle:
Framework Principle 2. Sentience candidature can warrant precautions. If 
S is a sentience candidate, then it is reckless/negligent to make decisions 
that create risks of suﬀering for S without considering the question of what 
precautions are proportionate to those risks. Reasonable disagreement 
about proportionality is to be expected, but we ought to reach a policy 
decision rather than leaving the matter unresolved indeﬁnitely.
Like Framework Principle 1, this principle is reaching for consensus— and so 
is unavoidably very thin. It deliberately avoids saying anything about what 
speciﬁc precautions might be warranted in any particular case. We will turn 
to such questions in Parts III–IV of the book. Moreover, the principle leaves 
open the possibility that at the end of our deliberations we decide that the 
proportionate response is to take no action. Imagine, for example, a scenario 
in which we ﬁnd evidence of sentience in microscopic dust mites su8cient to 
regard them as sentience candidates— we might nonetheless decide there is 
nothing we can do to help them that passes the tests of proportionality. We 
should expect disagreement in speciﬁc cases. A general commitment to pro-
portionality does not imply any particular outcome, when people disagree 
about what is proportionate.
But how can we move beyond these disagreements? Sometimes, where 
consensus on speciﬁc courses of action is lacking, there can still be consensus 
on a suitable procedure for reaching decisions. I propose it can be a point of 
wide agreement that our procedures should be informed, inclusive, and 
demo crat ic. They should be ‘informed’ in the sense that decisions should be 
based on the latest scientiﬁc evidence, not on ignorance. Given that this is an 
area in which new evidence is constantly emerging, this need for decisions to 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
