5O6./ O( 7OO6 0)15,-5. 1N6 2-5.N/-N7 /58.9./ 
28:
14.2 Codes of Good Practice and Licensing Schemes
A recurring theme of this book is that our ability to innovate can easily out-
run our ability to regulate. New types of farming and research, even whole 
new types of sentient being, can be created before any framework exists for 
protecting their welfare. The growing interest in invertebrate farming is one 
important instance.
The idea of invertebrate farming is not new— far from it. In particular, 
shrimp aquaculture is already a huge global enterprise, with something in the 
region of 200–500 billion animals farmed per year.; Insect farming already 
exists too, focusing mainly on crickets, black soldier ﬂy larvae, and mealworm 
beetle larvae (mealworms). Interest in insect farming is growing, driven by 
the idea that insects, especially when fed on human food waste, can provide a 
highly eﬃcient and sustainable source of protein. Since 2021, the EU has 
begun approving novel insect- based protein products for human consump-
tion, a4er a long period of reluctance.3 IPIFF (the International Platform of 
Insects for Food and Feed), an organization representing the interests of the 
EU’s insect farming sector, has more than eighty companies as members. 
According to Jeﬀ Sebo and Jason Schukra4, both critics of the industry, insect 
farming ‘is small now, but poised to grow 50 times larger in the next decade’. 
Even if the industry struggles to convince humans to eat more insects, as I 
suspect it might, we can expect growing use of insects to produce feed for 
farmed chickens and ﬁshes.?
Regulation is not keeping up. I am o4en troubled by the mismatch between 
the fast- paced start- up energy of new farming enterprises and the slow pace 
with which animal welfare regulations are changing in their wake. The UK 
recognizing decapod crustaceans as sentient beings was a positive step, but 
only the ﬁrst step. As I write this, I can check the website of a shrimp farm in 
the UK and see the phrase ‘high welfare standards’. But where are these stand-
ards published, and who oversees them? Why should I have any conﬁdence 
in this claim? The situation is even worse for insects, since they are not recog-
nized in law as sentient. The problem is not limited to invertebrates either. In 
; http://ﬁshcount.org.uk/ﬁsh- count- estimates- 2/numbers- of- farmed- decapod- crustaceans.
3 https://ipiﬀ.org/insects- novel- food- eu- legislation- 2/. Some insect products (such as honey and 
cochineal) have always been legal; the debate has focused on novel insect- based protein products.
? Ryan (2019). See Lesnik (2018) for an analysis and critique of the widespread scepticism about 
entomophagy in Western societies.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
