CURA()NG ,-(),N.: /0ARN)NG 1R,2 (30 C/)2A(0 A..024/5 U6 
788
a radical climate action plan that involves a £500 per tonne carbon tax by 
2030, the introduction of Universal Basic Income, and a ‘Green quantitative 
easing’ scheme aimed at ‘radically reforming our money system’.9 As far as I 
can tell, this plan was not put to the assembly. They were presented with a 
menu of moderate options.
It is tempting to broaden the range of possibilities by using coarse- grained 
descriptions of general types of response, but this can lead to recommenda-
tions that greatly underdetermine the actual policy. For example, 99 per cent 
of the Climate Assembly UK agreed that ‘forests and better forest manage-
ment’ were a good idea, but they were not asked to choose among speciﬁc 
policy options.: At the 2019 general election, all the UK’s political parties 
were in favour of forests, but speciﬁc proposals varied widely, from planting 
30 million trees a year (Conservatives) to 100 million a year (Labour).; 
The Climate Assembly’s pro- forest stance was neutral between these spe-
ciﬁc options.
This example crystallizes a general problem: the options on the table need 
to be speciﬁc and detailed if they are to meaningfully guide policy. So, there 
must be a small number of them, if the panel’s task is to be accomplished in a 
matter of days. This means there must be a signiﬁcant amount of prior cur-
ation of the options, and that creates an opportunity for the curators to exert 
excessive inﬂuence. A sceptic might say: ‘Doesn’t this substantiate the con-
cern that such assemblies are really an exercise in expertise laundering? Don’t 
they just create a mechanism whereby a pre- vetted list of policies endorsed by 
experts can be cleverly repackaged (unless they meet with strong disapproval) 
as the recommendations of the people?’
However, institutional design can manage the problem in a way that 
defuses this expertise laundering concern. As Landemore has argued, a prin-
ciple of openness needs to be at the heart of our design choices: any assembly 
must be open to points of view from outside the assembly.4 We can achieve 
openness by (i) publishing the proposals that are to be put forward for con-
sideration, well in advance of the panel meeting, and (ii) creating a mech an - 
ism whereby stakeholders can, before the panel meets, force consideration of 
additional options, as long as they are feasible. That creates room for a 
correction if the list of options is widely seen as impoverished according to a 
signiﬁcant stakeholder group, and it creates a pathway by which criticism can 
lead to an expansion of the list of options.
9 UK Green Party (2020).
: Climate Assembly UK (2020, p. 26).
; Morris (2019).
4 Landemore (2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
