5
The Science of Consciousness  
and Emotion
5.1 Grades of Optimism
It is time to cross that vague border from the philosophy to the science of 
sentience. Two areas of science are especially relevant: the science of con-
sciousness and the science of emotion. Although these may seem like closely 
related topics, there is a surprising amount of distance between them. Many 
consciousness scientists rarely think about emotion, aﬀect, or valence (as we 
will see, they focus primarily on vision). Meanwhile, many emotion scientists 
rarely think about consciousness. Two of the best- known exceptions— Joseph 
LeDoux and Jaak Panksepp— will feature heavily in the chapter.
To say that these ﬁelds contain a lot of disagreement would be an under-
statement. This is not the place for a detailed survey of all the positions cur-
rently held. When theories are coming and going at speed, journal articles do 
a better job at providing regular updates.1 Instead, I want to concentrate ini-
tially on the underlying reasons for disagreement in the science of conscious-
ness. Those reasons are likely to outlive currently popular theories. I will then 
turn to the special case of valenced experience, usually studied under the 
heading of ‘emotion’ or ‘aﬀect’, and consider how those general sources of 
disagreement surface in this case.2
There are two types of strong optimist I oppose. One is the optimist who 
says: ‘I already know the correct theory of sentience. It is the one outlined in 
my latest book. It implies that sentience is present in cases ABC, absent in 
cases XYZ. So, enough of all this blather about uncertainty.’ The second is the 
type who, while acknowledging that we do not have a complete theoretical 
picture now, nonetheless believes it is just around the corner. They might say: 
‘Why expend so much eﬀort developing a precautionary framework for 
1 See Seth and Bayne (2022).
2 Along similar lines, Matthias Michel (2019) has provided an analysis of the persistence sources of 
underdetermination in consciousness science from the nineteenth century to the present day.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
