,OG1)6/ 8H91N. /21H78,.) 
2CI
Why is high welfare unachievable in octopus farming? In brief, a basic 
problem is that octopuses are (with very rare exceptions) solitary animals 
that are aggressive and territorial in the presence of conspeciﬁcs. They are 
also so4- skinned. Pack octopuses together in a small space and they will 
experience stress, and it is likely that they will physically harm each other. 
Sometimes stress also leads them to self- harm: to cannibalize their own arms. 
They are also easily injured by handling or by collisions with hard surfaces 
when they jet to escape threat.1J
Aquaria ﬁnd octopuses challenging to keep, since they need individual 
tanks with an environment enriched with appropriate shelter and cognitive 
stimulation. But aquaria are not even trying to rear octopuses at scale. A 
farming business that held octopuses in the sort of enriched individual tanks 
used by aquaria would not be an economically realistic proposition, and yet 
this is what an honest code of good practice would have to require.
Moreover, in contrast to insects, there is no reason to think that octopus 
farming might form part of a sustainable way of meeting the world’s protein 
needs, since octopuses are predators that must be fed on other ﬁsh. There is, 
then, no reason to extend the sort of cautious permission to octopus farming 
that we might want to extend to insect farming.
Proposal 20. Octopus farming. It is very unlikely that octopus farming can 
meet reasonable expectations regarding welfare and humane slaughter. It 
would be proportionate to ban octopus farming.
14.4 Towards Humane Slaughter
Some of the most emotive issues concerning invertebrate welfare are ‘end of 
life’ issues. Crabs and lobsters are commonly dropped into pans of boiling 
water and cooked alive. The issue of live boiling has become a totemic one for 
invertebrate welfare more generally. It was only a4er I ﬁrst wrote about it11 
that I came across David Foster Wallace’s famous article ‘Consider the 
lobster’.1; For Foster Wallace, our brutal treatment of lobsters was symbolic of 
a broader attitude towards the natural world. It is a serious animal welfare 
1J See Birch et al. (2021); Jacquet et al. (2019). A short piece by Schnell et al. (2022) summarizes 
the main issues.
11 Birch (2017e).
1; Foster Wallace (2005).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
