A -RAG2A()C ANA/5.). ,1 -R,-,R(),NA/)(5 
787
personal experience of this, since many of our rights were temporarily sus-
pended by lockdowns. These lockdowns were not unconstitutional; they were 
lawful suspensions of rights. The upshot is that very few proposals should be 
excluded at this ﬁrst stage. If a proposal involves a suspension of qualiﬁed 
rights in a way that may or may not be proportionate, depending on other 
factors, then it should remain on the table for further discussion.
That said, international law recognizes a small number of absolute (or ‘non- 
derogable’) rights that, by international agreement, cannot be appropriately 
restricted in any circumstance, no matter how exceptional. The International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognizes several such rights: the 
‘right to life’; the right to freedom from torture and from cruel, inhuman, or 
degrading treatment or punishment; the right to freedom from medical or 
scientiﬁc experimentation without consent; the right to freedom from slavery 
and servitude; the right to freedom from imprisonment for in abil ity to fulﬁl a 
contractual obligation; the right to freedom from the retrospective operation 
of criminal laws; the right to recognition as a person before the law; and the 
right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion. I propose that any pre-
caution violating any of these rights is ipso facto disproportionate and should 
be taken oﬀ the table.A
The right to life is a source of complications, since national laws typically 
make room for exceptions, despite the supposedly ‘non- derogable’ nature of 
the right. In particular, the intentional killing of a person by the police or 
armed forces in the course of their duties is not always deemed a violation of 
the right to life. Moreover, public health emergencies, such as the COVID- 19 
pandemic, typically put decision- makers in a situation where, whatever they 
decide, some people will foreseeably die. There may be intentional allowing 
of a certain level of death, albeit without intentional killing. Relevantly for 
our purposes, the fact that restricting scientiﬁc research in certain ways may 
foreseeably involve foregoing medical breakthroughs does not mean that 
restrictions violate anyone’s right to life.
I have been describing the legal element of the ‘permissibility- in- principle’ 
test, but I am not proposing that it is solely a legal test. There could be lawful 
options that nonetheless represent such a severe departure from our shared 
moral values that a citizens’ panel deems them impermissible- in- principle on 
moral grounds. Suppose, for example, that we convene a panel to consider 
possible responses to a pandemic, and one of the options ﬂoated is a coercive 
programme of mandatory vaccination. The experts report that this is 
A UN General Assembly (International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
