2() 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
larvae bore into them; many insects which go about their normal life whilst 
being eaten by large internal parasitoids; and male mantids which continue 
to mate as they are being eaten by their partners.8
These sources inﬂuenced the Institute of Medical Ethics report in 1991 that 
singled out cephalopods as uniquely likely candidates for sentience among 
invertebrates, indirectly leading to the protection of Octopus vulgaris in sci-
ence in the UK.9
The reported absence of manifest pain in response to catastrophic injury is 
certainly striking. What might explain this? An initially tempting explanation 
goes: perhaps there is no adaptive bene:t to feeling pain when the cuticle (or 
exoskeleton) is damaged, because insects cannot heal wounds to the cuticle, 
and so have nothing to gain from tending or guarding those wounds. 
However, locusts can repair injuries to the cuticle, albeit imperfectly, return-
ing the surface to about two- thirds of its original strength.; Insects capable of 
repair would bene:t, just as we do, from a response that helped them avoid 
further injury during repair. A diﬀerent possibility is that responses to injury 
exist in insects but are under decentralized control, with responses to abdom-
inal injuries regulated by abdominal ganglia and responses to thoracic in jur-
ies regulated by thoracic ganglia.
There is an interesting physiological puzzle here, but we should be wary of 
drawing any sweeping conclusion that insects do not feel pain. All three of 
the pieces just quoted include important quali:cations. On closer exam in-
ation, Bastin’s view that insects do not feel pain is heavily reliant on a distinc-
tion between pain and discomfort, for he grants that ‘there is some evidence 
to support the view that they suﬀer varying degrees of discomfort, especially 
when their antennae are pinched, or when strong corrosive substances are 
applied to their nerve endings’.6 Pain, for Bastin, appears to be a term reserved 
for pain felt in response to catastrophic injury; all else is mere discomfort. 
This terminological choice would be controversial if adopted in human 
medicine.
Wigglesworth, meanwhile, adds that ‘I am sure that insects can feel pain if 
the right stimulus is given. High temperature seems the clearest example, and 
perhaps electric shocks. For practical purposes why not assume that this is 
so?’7 And Eisemann et al. end on a similarly precautionary note:
8 Eisemann et al. (1984, p. 166).
9 Smith and Boyd (1991).
; Parle et al. (2016).
6 Bastin (1927, p. 531).
7 Wigglesworth (1980, p. 9).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
