67A 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
precautionary pain management in newborns. This is partly because of abun-
dant evidence linking pain and stress indicators in neonates to subsequent 
long- term developmental problems.E Regardless of one’s views about whether 
neonates are experiencing pain or merely mounting nociceptive and stress 
responses without any subjective experience, everyone can agree that states 
which lead to long- term developmental problems need to be managed. 
Common ground— overlapping consensus across the zone of reasonable 
disagreement— has been created.
History ofen shows us the disquieting contingency of moral progress.1F 
There was nothing inevitable about the change to clinical practice that 
occurred in the 1980s. Building an evidence base concerning nociception and 
stress in newborns required courage and tenacity. Yet it is implausible to 
imagine that Anand and Hickey’s evidence of nociception would have been 
enough by itself to change clinical guidelines around the world. As childhood 
pain expert Patrick McGrath has argued, Lawson’s campaign, and the public 
outcry it created, was probably also essential.11
Looking back, it does not surprise me that many anaesthetists doubted 
whether newborns felt pain, because of course one can harbour such doubts. 
The surprise is how some of them chose to manage the risks. The idea of 
premising any action on an assumption of non- sentience (such as performing 
major surgery without anaesthesia) was always questionable, even when the 
evidence base was much thinner than it is now. The most charitable in ter-
pret ation of the old practice is that anaesthesiologists were open to the possi-
bility of sentience but were concerned about the safety of using anaesthetics 
on neonates, and that those safety concerns weighed more heavily in their 
calculations than concerns about pain and its consequences. Yet anaesthesi-
ologists should also have worried about the safety of doing surgery during 
massive stress responses— and should have considered the possibility that 
anaesthesia might make the surgery safer on balance. Recall here that even 
the control group in Anand and Hickey’s study still received light anaesthesia, 
and in this group the stress response was so enormous it posed a clear safety 
risk. It is a shock to realize that many procedures did not even involve light 
anaesthesia prior to Anand and Hickey’s work.
There is an echo here of Chapter 9. Pre- 1980s attitudes towards neonates 
bear a certain resemblance to the attitudes sometimes expressed even now 
E For reviews, see Vinall and Grunau (2014) and Walker (2019). For some signiﬁcant studies, see 
Brummelte et al. (2012); Doesburg et al. (2013); Grunau et al. (2005, 2007).
1F Buchanan and Powell (2018).
11 McGrath (2011).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
