2G2 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
So, the path to regarding plasticity as evidence of sentience requires us to 
set aside one of the most basic, most fundamental pieces of common ground 
in animal sentience research. We are being asked to take seriously the possi-
bility that, while sentience has no role in guiding development in animals, 
sentience in plants does have this role.
Suppose I were to make an analogous speculation concerning animals. 
That is: imagine me proposing that, in animals, there is a second form of sen-
tience, one that requires no neural basis and is already at work early in early 
embryonic development before the central nervous system has developed. 
One can, of course, entertain such ideas in a speculative mode. However, 
there is no positive evidence for a non- neural, development- guiding form of 
sentience. Developmental plasticity alone is not evidence. In the absence of 
any credible evidence, it would be inappropriate to take any precautionary 
steps to protect this imagined non- neural form of sentience in animals.
The same goes for the idea of plant sentience. One can entertain the idea in 
a speculative mode, but it is no less speculative than analogous hypotheses 
about sentience in developing, non- neural animal tissue. If intended as 
seminar- room speculations, aimed at reminding us of our ignorance about 
the nature of consciousness, these ideas may be harmless. But if anyone 
claims these speculations to be evidence- based theories that need to be taken 
seriously when making grave practical decisions, they are wrong.
What is the diﬀerence with the case of invertebrates? There are two major 
diﬀerences. One is that we can directly apply experimental approaches used 
to assess pain in mammals, such as conditioned place avoidance tests, and 
observe behaviour that, if the animal were a mammal, would clearly indicate 
pain. When an octopus scrapes at the site of a noxious stimulus with their 
beak, tends the area with their other arms, becomes averse to a chamber 
where they experienced the stimulus’s eﬀects, and comes to prefer a chamber 
where they experienced the eﬀects of a local anaesthetic, it becomes very 
diFcult— indeed, reckless— to con:dently dismiss the possibility of pain.66 
This leads to a challenge for plant sentience researchers: if you can produce 
experimental results in plants comparable to those that have shifed opinion 
regarding invertebrates, many of us will have our con:dence shaken.
The second big diﬀerence is that we know there are, in cephalopod mol-
luscs, decapod crustaceans and adult insects, brain mechanisms functionally 
similar to those of the vertebrate midbrain. It is reasonable to theorize, based 
on the mammalian evidence, that these mechanisms may be minimally 
66 Crook (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
