24 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
‘Qualia’ is even worse in this respect.1 But Feigl was right to suggest that, 
when we focus on our immediate, ‘raw’ experiences of the world and of our 
own bodies, there is something very puzzling about how these experiences 
relate to the physical world.
Think of experiencing pain, a quiet or loud noise, the colour of a blue sky 
or a sunset, the smell of coﬀee or rotten eggs. As Thomas Nagel put it, there is 
‘something it’s like’ to have these experiences.2 You would not be able to con-
vey what it’s like to another human who lacked the relevant sensory ability. 
Those facts about ‘what it’s like’ seem, at least on the face of it, to be missing 
from any purely physical description of the brain processes involved. There is 
a notorious explanatory gap between brain processes and the facts about 
what it’s like to have an experience: no amount of information about brain 
processes seems enough to satisfactorily explain why those processes feel like 
something from the inside.3 The problem of explaining how facts about what 
it’s like to be us are related to brain activity is what David Chalmers has called 
‘the hard problem of consciousness’.4
Nagel famously illustrated the point with the example of a bat hunting by 
echolocation, a sensory ability most humans entirely lack.5 As a person with 
no ability to echolocate, I have a strong intuition that I could know every-
thing there is to know about the brain processes going on in the bat as it echo-
locates and yet still be le6 wondering: what is it like to echolocate from the 
point of view of the bat? What is the bat experiencing? This intuitive reaction 
may ultimately be misleading. Many have resisted the idea that there really 
are further facts about conscious experience, above and beyond facts about 
brain processes. We will come back to this debate in Chapter 3. But all can 
agree the example is a wonderful one for illustrating the puzzle of sentience 
in Feigl’s sense, the sense that generates the explanatory gap and the hard 
problem. In the 1990s, Ned Block coined the term ‘phenomenal conscious-
ness’ for this sense of the word ‘consciousness’.7
1 ‘Qualia’ sometimes refers to a certain type of theoretical posit in a theory of perception, also 
called ‘mental paint’ (Block 1996; Papineau 2021). Meanwhile, some use it to refer to special, non- 
physical properties posited by dualist theories of consciousness. Carruthers (2000, 2019) uses the 
term like this, and so declares himself a ‘qualia irrealist’. But one could reject both ‘mental paint’ and 
dualism and still need a way of talking, in a theoretically non- committal way, about the quality of the 
experience of seeing a blue sky or a red tomato. ‘Qualities’ is probably the best we can do for this 
purpose.
2 Nagel (1974).
3 Levine (1983).
4 Chalmers (1995).
5 I say ‘most’ because some blind people navigate the world using sonar and may have some insight 
into what it’s like to echolocate, as Nagel (1974, p. 442 n. 8) observed.
7 Block (1995).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
