blood cells in your bone marrow, or to be breaking down proteins into amino 
acids. As mentioned in Chapter 1, the same can be said of many brain pro-
cesses. Early stages of sensory processing (e.g. processing in the retina and 
optic tract) and some aspects of low- level motor control (e.g. your tiny adjust-
ments to your grip strength as you grasp a cup, and the computations that 
produce these adjustments) occur outside conscious experience, as do 
the  processes that occur during dreamless sleep or that prepare you for 
 waking up.
Putting the two lists side by side will not be enough to triangulate a single 
property, for there will be many properties that diﬀer between them. But to 
narrow things down, we can say, Schwitzgebel proposes, that ‘phenomenal 
consciousness is the most folk- psychologically obvious thing or feature that 
the positive examples possess and that the negative examples lack’.14 Yet this 
assumes that phenomenal consciousness is a posit of folk psychology (i.e. 
common- sense, everyday psychology) akin to beliefs, desires, thoughts, feel-
ings, emotions, and so on. I doubt this. I think ‘phenomenal consciousness’ is 
a term of art, a theoretical concept we acquire through reﬂection on the 
mind- body problem and the explanatory gap. Once we see the gap, we see the 
need for a term that denotes the source of the gap. But the distinctions 
between sentience, sapience and sel?ood, and other related distinctions, take 
work to get your head around. They are not posits of everyday psychology. 
My suspicion seems to be borne out by experimental work investigating this 
issue, which has cast doubt on the idea that non- specialists, prior to any 
encounter with philosophy, already have a well- formed concept of phe nom-
enal consciousness.15
The wider point is that de!nitions more substantial than ‘what it’s like’ 
always add contentious assumptions and, consequently, no longer succeed in 
capturing common ground in the science and philosophy of consciousness. 
They instead describe common ground for one part of the !eld, such as the 
dualist part, the part committed to the ‘folk- psychological obviousness’ of 
phenomenal consciousness, and so forth.
What to make of this situation? I think of the ‘phenomenal consciousness’ 
concept as unstable common ground. Unstable because no one wants to rest 
here: everyone wants to pull the science and philosophy of consciousness 
14 Schwitzgebel (2016, p. 229, italics added).
15 Sytsma (2010); Sytsma and Machery (2010); Sytsma and Ozdemir (2019). Sytsma and col lab or-
ators take a bold further step: they propose that, since everyday psychology has no concept of phe-
nom enal consciousness, there is no problem of consciousness. This seems to me to exaggerate the 
relevance of everyday psychology to the mind- body problem.
‘-(),OB),8C CO,/C0O:/,)//’ 8/ :,/T8DC) COBBO, EFO:,9 
2J
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
