2EI 
PU,-./0 1-2 34U/567.2,
involvement of attention and working memory.28 There remains an im port-
ant missing element, namely response timing. An essential part of trace eye-
blink conditioning in mammals is timing the conditioned response precisely 
to line up with the US; the versions so far implemented in insects still lack 
this component.
We also noted, in the last chapter, two other forms of learning for which 
there is evidence of facilitation by conscious perception in humans: reversal 
learning and some kinds of instrumental learning. Both bumblebees and 
honeybees will quickly learn reversals of stimulus contingencies.29 They are 
also very capable instrumental learners, even when the learned behaviour is 
novel and context- speci:c, as shown, for example, in string- pulling, ball- 
rolling, and puzzle- box tasks.2;
As with a case based on evaluative modelling or on working memory, an 
inference from learning abilities to sentience will not be universally persua-
sive. It will do most to raise the probability of sentience for those already sym-
pathetic to a theoretical perspective, such as Ginsburg and Jablonka’s UAL 
framework, that posits a close connection between sentience and learning. 
All can agree, however, that the case is stronger when we are not simply :nd-
ing the simplest forms of associative learning, but speci:c forms that in our 
own case are facilitated by conscious experience. The case is yet stronger 
when we :nd that these sophisticated forms of learning are supported by dis-
tinctive pathways, separate from those supporting simpler kinds of learning, 
and when those pathways turn out to have features (such as sensitivity to dis-
traction) that characterize the consciousness- involving pathways in us.
13.3 Insects as Sentience Candidates
The four broad sources of evidence so far considered (traditional pain indica-
tors, judgement bias tests, functional analogies between the midbrain and 
central complex, and cognitive tests of working memory/sophisticated asso-
ciative learning) are all probability raising, especially when taken together as 
28 Grover et al. (2022). Droege et al. (2021) proposed this ‘distraction’ criterion as a relevant test for 
consciousness shortly before the Grover et al. study was published.
29 Chittka (1998); Sherry and Strang (2015); Strang and Sherry (2014). These results are discussed 
in Birch (2022c).
2; Alem et al. (2016); Bridges et al. (2023); Galpayage Dona et al. (2022); Loukola et al. (2017); 
Mirwan and Kevan (2014).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
