MNN 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
and requires social interaction with the world and with other people. Among 
contemporary theories of consciousness, the closest relative is probably 
Rolls’s higher- order syntactic thought theory.:6
In 2007, Derbyshire presented a similar line of argument in written evi-
dence submitted to the UK parliament’s Science and Technology Committee 
as part of their inquiry into scientiﬁc developments potentially relevant to 
abortion law:
Clearly our access to others’ pain is mediated through behavior and lan-
guage but this is also true of our own pain experience. Social development 
structures our behavior and language so as to be meaningful to the outside 
world but with the unnoticed side eﬀect of rendering the child’s inner 
ex peri ence meaningful to him or her. While brain development is certainly 
a necessary precursor of conscious sensory awareness, merely peering 
inside the head will not reveal the source of awareness.
21. This is how we can be so positive that the fetus is not conscious and, 
therefore, cannot experience pain. Not only has the biological development 
not yet occurred but also the post- birth environment, so necessary to the 
development of experience, has not yet made itself felt. In short, fetal pain is 
a moral blunder based on the false equivalence between observer and 
observed that misses the whole point and process of development.:?
The Committee quoted extensively from Derbyshire’s evidence, concluding 
that ‘while the evidence suggests that fetuses have physiological reactions to 
noxious stimuli, it does not indicate that pain is consciously felt’.:8
This exempliﬁes a common yet problematic pattern of reasoning regarding 
the edge of sentience. The author ﬁrstly observes an explanatory gap between 
conscious experience and the indicators we use to assess it; and, secondly, 
expresses sympathy for a theory of conscious experience that is relatively cog-
nitively demanding, pushing this capacity beyond the reach of the system in 
question. Both thoughts are entirely reasonable ones to have. Yet, when pre-
sented to policy- makers using conﬁdent, unhedged language, they can lead to 
policies being premised on assumptions that are in fact highly uncertain, 
neglecting relevant risks.
The existence of an explanatory gap between conscious experience and its 
outward indicators is something we all have to acknowledge, but not a reason 
to deny the evidential import of behavioural, cognitive, and neural indicators. 
:6 Rolls (2014).
:? Derbyshire (2007).
:8 Science and Technology Committee (2007, p. 25).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
