A -RAG2A()C ANA/5.). ,1 -R,-,R(),NA/)(5 
78E
their own happiness— should be involved in making that decision. At the 
edge of sentience, by contrast, the question is one of moral acceptability: what 
risks ought we not accept, as people who recognize a duty not to cause gra-
tuit ous suﬀering to other sentient beings? And it might be supposed that we 
need to leave this to ethics experts, not to ordinary citizens. The objection 
goes: I am incorrectly conﬂating issues of prudential acceptability with issues 
of moral acceptability, and incorrectly assuming a framework apt for man-
aging the former is apt for managing the latter.
In my view, though, it is right to involve the public even when the question 
is speciﬁcally one of moral acceptability. Recall the principle (endorsed in 
Chapter 7) that value conﬂicts in a democratic society, including moral con-
ﬂicts, should be resolved democratically. Any other approach involves elevat-
ing an anointed group as the experts on the relative importance of the 
conﬂicting values, when we have no reason to believe that there are any such 
experts. This, and not the superior epistemic standpoint of the citizens 
regarding their own interests, is the fundamental ethical rationale for involv-
ing the public (the epistemic point is a subsidiary one, relevant to resisting 
worries about competence). If we were to allow a panel of ethicists to set the 
threshold for acceptable risk reduction, conﬂict between values would be 
resolved by undemocratic means. We would be elevating the ethicists’ values 
over the values of the wider population.
What, then, is the proper role for experts in debates about adequacy? Their 
role is that of providing estimates of the level of risk reduction diﬀerent 
options provide. There is oCen enormous uncertainty about the level of risk 
reduction an option will deliver. It is therefore crucial that experts communi-
cate their uncertainty about risk. Two tools are particularly useful for that 
task: conﬁdence levels and probability yardsticks.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has developed a 
‘conﬁdence levels’ framework for communicating uncertainty about risks.F 
IPCC experts express conﬁdence levels (very low, low, medium, high, or very 
high conﬁdence) regarding claims about risk, with their conﬁdence depend-
ing on the volume and quality of scientiﬁc evidence in support of the claim 
and the amount of consensus surrounding it. I suggest that this approach be 
generally adopted for the communication of uncertainty to citizens’ panels. 
For example, experts should say not ‘Option 1 will reduce the risk more than 
Option 2’ but rather ‘I/we have high conﬁdence that Option 1 will reduce the 
risk more than Option 2’.
F IPCC (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
