78B 
D04A()NG -R,-,R(),NA/)(5
potentially lawful, since the right to refuse medical treatment can be suspended 
on public health grounds when proportionate. A panel might nonetheless 
ﬁnd such an option deeply unethical, and might decide that it would be better 
to rule it out immediately as impermissible- in- principle rather than spend 
time comparing it with other options.
Test 2: Adequacy
Informally, a proportionate response to a risk must do enough. The require-
ment is not that the response completely removes the identiﬁed risk, or even 
that it renders it negligible or no longer urgent. This is oCen unachievable, as 
the COVID- 19 pandemic clearly demonstrated. Many measures were taken, 
but none removed the risk, rendered it negligible, or removed its urgency.
We cannot specify a one- size- ﬁts- all threshold that must be achieved (e.g. 
the probability of the threat materializing must be reduced to 10 per cent or 
less). Such a threshold would be arbitrary and insu?ciently insensitive to the 
details of particular cases. Furthermore, we oCen ﬁnd ourselves in situations 
where agreed, precise probabilities cannot be placed on scenarios or outcomes. 
We are in exactly such a situation at the edge of sentience. We all have our 
own degrees of belief about these cases— our own subjective probabilities— 
but there is no agreement on precise probabilities.
So what is required of an adequate response? A proposal: the response 
should either (i) reduce the risk to an acceptable level or, if this is un achiev-
able, (ii) deliver the best level of risk reduction that can be achieved by any 
permissible- in- principle option.
The question of adequacy may initially sound like a scientiﬁc question— 
one that can be leC to the experts, without input from citizens— but it is not. 
This is because the judgement of an acceptable level of risk is an evaluative 
judgement. Our way of life depends on tolerating risks: to drive a car is to 
tolerate risk of injury, to interact with other people in the same room is 
toDtolerate risk of communicable disease. But the question of what levels of 
risk are acceptable is a question for the people who will be taking the risks, 
not for an elite group of experts.
It might be objected that the question of acceptability (and thus of propor-
tionality) is diﬀerent when it comes to risks at the edge of sentience. OCen, as 
with driving and social interaction, the question is one of prudential ac cept-
abil ity: what risks ought we accept for the sake of our own happiness? It is 
clear why ordinary citizens— being the experts on their own interests and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
