+6 :/,6:+/96 )D1)2+),:) /,) M+,­ /2 M7,0F 
BN
needs. James writes, against the epiphenomenalist or (in his words) automa-
ton theorist:
if pleasures and pains have no eﬃcacy, one does not see (without some such 
a priori rational harmony as would be scouted by the ‘scientiﬁc’ champions 
of the automaton theory) why the most noxious acts, such as burning, might 
not give thrills of delight, and the most necessary ones, such as breathing, 
cause agony.O
The subtle adaptive alignment of our valenced experiences with our biological 
needs has the hallmarks of an evolved adaptation. It is scientiﬁcally inexplicable 
except as the product of gradual shaping by natural selection over evolutionary 
time. But to be selected, it must have eﬀects.
As James notes, an epiphenomenalist can escape this problem only by pos-
iting that the mysterious psychophysical laws that link brain states to con-
scious experiences— and that are not themselves products of natural 
selection— build in a wonderful, fortuitous harmony between experiential 
quality and biological need. But then the epiphenomenalist owes us an 
ex plan ation for that harmony. Of course, they could reach here for intelligent 
design, but that is to abandon any claim to scientiﬁc credibility, which is pre-
sumably why James puts ‘scientiﬁc’ inside those wry inverted commas.1P
Where does this leave us? Epiphenomenalism is not beyond the pale— it is 
a reasonable, coherent picture— but there are good reasons to ﬁnd it very 
unlikely to be true. And so what is unreasonable is to dogmatically insist, in 
the manner of Watson, that sentience leaves no imprint on behaviour, as if 
this were an obvious truth. Alternative pictures on which sentience does make 
a di!erence and does leave a detectable signature on cognition and behaviour 
are not only possible— they are actually a lot more plausible.
3.3 Is Conscious Experience One Kind or Many?
How, then, might conscious experience in5uence cognition and behaviour? 
In philosophy, three very di!erent ways of securing the causal eﬃcacy of 
experience have long shared the stage: materialism, interactionist dualism, 
and pan(proto)psychism. Materialism is the majority view, while the other 
O James (1890/1918, pp. 143–144).
1P For discussion James’s objection to epiphenomenalism, see Klein (2019) and Mørch (2017).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
