K4U7 ./L2,1.061.4/ P7.47.1.2, 
2EA
isolated buccal ganglia (these ganglia lie outside the three main pairs of gan-
glia, at the mouth) and, most remarkably of all, in single neurons taken from 
these ganglia.91 In so far as it can be achieved by a single neuron, the form of 
operant conditioning in evidence here— increased :ring of a neuron afer a 
reward signal— should not be taken as evidence of sentience. We should look 
for forms of learning that go beyond the simplest forms of operant condition-
ing and more closely mimic the tasks that seem to require consciousness in 
humans.
In light of all this, I see the gastropods as an investigation priority. It could 
well be that they are capable of forms of learning linked to consciousness in 
humans, and of other behaviours that have shifed opinions in the case of 
cephalopods, decapods, and insects, such as conditioned place preference 
and subtle motivational trade- oﬀs involving the internal representation of 
options. But there has been no systematic attempt to look. That is a worrying 
state of aﬀairs, especially when interest in snail farming is growing in the UK 
and elsewhere, to some extent driven by the idea that gastropods might pro-
vide a more sustainable protein source than traditional livestock.92
Eric Schwitzgebel has used the snail as a way of making the point that ‘that 
we human beings, in our current scienti:c condition, have little ground for 
making con:dent assertions’ about the distribution of consciousness in the 
natural world.98 He adds: ‘I :nd something wonderful in not knowing. . . . There’s 
something marvelous about the fact that I can wander into my backyard, lif 
a snail, and gaze at it, unsure.’99 I wish I could take similar delight in our 
ignorance, but my mind is inexorably drawn towards the practical question of 
whether gastropods should be brought within frameworks to protect animal 
welfare, and, if so, how. It is deeply frustrating to have so little evidence 
on which to base such decisions.
I will not discuss other molluscs in detail, since I take gastropods to be the 
closest of the non- cephalopod molluscs to reaching the bar for sentience can-
didature. For bivalve molluscs, we are much further away from having a suf-
:cient case, despite a small number of studies showing various forms of 
behavioural plasticity, most notably the escape responses of the scallop trig-
gered by the presence of star:sh.9;
91 Brembs et al. (2002).
92 Passino (2019).
98 Schwitzgebel (2020, p. 41).
99 Schwitzgebel (2020, p. 59).
9; Robson et al. (2010); Selbach et al. (2022); Speiser and Wilkens (2016); Wilkens (1981); Wilson 
et al. (2012). Thanks to Heather Browning for searching this literature.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
