)C4 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
Why is conditioned place avoidance a source of insight into sentience? It is 
signiﬁcant that it is not just an instance of classical conditioning, in which a 
pattern on the wall is paired with a noxious stimulus, and so comes to elicit 
the same response as that stimulus. If that were all that was happening, we 
would expect the visual stimulus of the chamber walls to elicit the same 
response as acetic acid: skin- scraping. But what in fact happens is more 
sophisticated: the animal’s preferences change. To explain this, we need to 
posit a system that is evaluating locations in the environment for their associ-
ated risks and rewards based on past experience, navigating the animal 
towards opportunity and away from risk. That is, we need to posit exactly the 
sort of central evaluation system that, on Merker’s theory, is suﬃcient for 
sentience.
Example 2: ‘Anxiety-Like States’ in Crayﬁsh
Physiological stress, deﬁned as any situation that disrupts homeostasis, is not 
itself a marker of sentience. Any living system has mechanisms to maintain 
homeostasis in the face of perturbations, so this alone does not help us draw 
any distinction between sentient and non- sentient life. Yet inducing stress is a 
common component of many experiments probing sentience, because the 
way in which an animal responds to stress can oﬀer relevant evidence. When 
an animal responds to stress in ways that indicate centralized evaluation of 
opportunities and risks— with stress altering the value of the options in ways 
that can be experimentally manipulated— we have some evidence of the sort 
of centralized evaluative modelling that is credibly linked to sentience.
An impressive series of studies by a team at the University of Bordeaux has 
used this strategy to obtain evidence of ‘anxiety- like’ states in the crayﬁsh 
Procambarus clarkii. In the ﬁrst study, crayﬁsh were placed in a maze in 
which they were free to explore both light and dark arms. When electrical 
ﬁelds were used to induce physiological stress in the animals, they became 
substantially less willing to enter the light arms. There was evidence that the 
eﬀect was mediated by endogenous serotonin, a neurotransmitter linked to 
anxiety and depression in humans. The mechanisms are plainly not the same 
as those in the human brain. Yet it turned out, remarkably, that administering 
a common anti- anxiety drug designed for humans, chlordiazepoxide (ofen 
sold as Librium), restored a willingness to explore the light arms in the 
stressed crayﬁsh, relative to a control group injected with saline. The authors 
argued that this pattern of results pointed to the existence of a brain state 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
