/:BB8FO O. C(8-T)F Q 
4N
2.7 Summary of Chapter 2
Sentience has broader and narrower senses. In a broad sense, it refers to any 
capacity for conscious experience. Conscious experience here refers to ‘phe-
nom enal consciousness’, the idea that there is ‘something it’s like’ to be you. In 
a narrower sense, it refers speci!cally to the capacity to have valenced 
experiences— experiences that feel bad or feel good to the subject— such as 
experiences of pain and pleasure. This narrower sense of the term will be 
used as a working de!nition in the rest of the book (replacing the initial char-
acterization of sentience in Chapter 1, where it was introduced as ‘ethically 
signi!cant experience’).
A de!nition of sentience as the capacity for valenced experience can be 
common ground, despite continuing disagreement about the nature of con-
scious experience and the nature of valence. We can hope that the rather weak 
‘something it’s like’ de!nition of phenomenal consciousness will eventually 
be superseded by a more theoretically loaded successor, but this must await 
much more theoretical consensus than currently exists. There are, at present, 
many theories of phenomenal consciousness, displaying massive variation, 
some of which will be discussed in Chapters 3, 5, and 6.
Valence, meanwhile, is one of the two major dimensions, along with 
arousal, that structure our aﬀective experiences, and the one that matters 
most from an ethical point of view. Valenced experiences do not have to fall 
under traditional human categories. There may well be valenced experiences 
in other beings that our everyday categories (e.g. ‘pain’, ‘fear’, ‘anger’) fail to 
capture well.
There are three main accounts of the nature of valence (hedonic quality, 
non- conceptual representation of value, and imperative content), though all 
agree that valence is a real and general feature of aﬀective experience. 
Meanwhile, three major ethical theories (classical utilitarianism, Korsgaard’s 
neo- Kantian view, and Nussbaum’s capabilities approach) have converged 
from diﬀerent directions on the special ethical signi!cance of valence. There 
are no obvious logical entailments between theories of the nature of valence 
and theories of its ethical signi!cance, but some packages !t together better 
than others.
The Edge of Sentience: Risk and Precaution in Humans, Other Animals, and AI. Jonathan Birch, Oxford University Press. 
© Jonathan Birch 2024. DOI: 10.1093/9780191966729.003.0003
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
