67I 
2(TUB(B A.C (D4/0-B
Yet this thought ties abortion rights to a scientiﬁc question fraught with 
uncertainty, with troubling consequences. If the scientiﬁc evidence develops 
in a way that ends up pointing to ever earlier time points for the onset of sen-
tience, as it may well do, then the legal time limit will end up being pushed 
ever earlier, with serious consequences for women’s rights. Those of us sym-
pathetic to the cause of women’s rights need to be acutely aware of that risk. 
We should think about how to pre- empt it.
In fact, there are other reasons, aside from this possibility, to question the 
appropriateness of tying the legal time limit to the development of sentience. 
Firstly, most people do not regard sentience as suJcing, in other contexts, for 
rights. Consider farmed mammals, such as cows and pigs. There is ongoing 
disagreement about the ethical signiﬁcance of sentience (see Chapter 4), but 
sentience is not generally regarded as implying a right to life. There is consen-
sus that we should avoid causing gratuitous suﬀering to sentient beings 
(Chapter 6), but no consensus that animals have a right to life by virtue of 
being sentient. Admittedly, those who do think sentience implies a right to life 
should feel pressure to arrive at a consistent view about non- human animals 
and human fetuses.
Because sentience is not widely taken to imply a right to life, traditional 
debates about the ethics of abortion have tended to revolve around the con-
cept of personhood, not sentience. In a controversial article and subsequent 
book, Michael Tooley argued that fetuses are clearly not persons and, conse-
quently, do not possess the right to life that comes with personhood.1; He 
went further, arguing that newborn babies are also clearly not persons. Many 
have agreed with Tooley’s basic emphasis on the importance of personhood, 
while disagreeing with his stance regarding newborn babies. Critics some-
times reply that fetuses can be persons too, particularly in the later stages of 
development, and sometimes hold that merely potential personhood suJces 
for the associated rights.14
These issues turn on what personhood is, and there is no consensus about 
that. But that debate is independent of our present inquiry, which is about 
sentience, not personhood. A being can be sentient and yet not a person. 
Sentience is at most a necessary condition for personhood, not a suJcient 
condition. It may not even be a necessary condition. Mary Ann Warren has 
constructed an inﬂuential account of personhood in which, although 
1; Tooley (1972, 1983).
14 Greasley and Kaczor (2017) is a good entry point to this debate, presenting both sides. Greasley 
(2017) has provided an extended discussion and defence of the claim that the abortion debate is fun-
damentally about personhood.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
