3
The Mind-Body Problem
Disagreement about the nature of sentience is not going away any time soon. 
It is fanciful to think that researchers in the science and philosophy of sen-
tience will soon converge on a single, agreed theory. We will consider the 
reasons for this over the next three chapters. But from the outset, it’s im port-
ant to see that our predicament is not just one of a little uncertainty here and 
there on the margins of a theoretical picture we know to be broadly true in 
outline. The situation is one of radical uncertainty, with enormously di!erent 
alternatives on the table, new scientiﬁc theories appearing all the time, many 
further alternatives presumably yet to be conceived,1 and a lack of agreed 
strategies for narrowing down the space of possibilities.
This is a disturbing situation given that all of our cases at the edge of 
sentience— humans, other animals, AI— are cases where the question of what 
to do depends a great deal on which systems we regard as sentient. These 
cases can drive us to despair when we realize the full extent of disagreement 
and the diﬃculty of resolving it. This book is an attempt to ﬁnd the antidote 
to that despair. We are working towards a framework for reaching collective 
decisions that can command our conﬁdence even though we will continue to 
disagree.
As I emphasized in Chapter 1, at the core of that framework should be the 
need to in some sense ‘err on the side of caution’ in the face of radical uncer-
tainty about sentience. A person can harbour a lot of reasonable doubts about 
whether or not beings of a certain type are sentient, and yet still sign up to the 
need for precautions, just in case they are. Think of people, such as Kate 
Bainbridge, who were wrongly presumed unconscious when they were not. 
All can agree this should never happen. Well- designed precautions can be 
common ground. They don’t have to be controversial or polarizing. They 
need not reproduce in the domain of action the deep disagreement that exists 
at the level of theory. Thinking our way through the details of this line of 
thought will be the work of the next two parts of the book.
1 On the problem of unconceived alternatives in other areas of science, see Stanford (2006).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
