76J 
D04A()NG -R,-,R(),NA/)(5
by evidence and not based on mere prejudice. That sort of consistency is 
 speciﬁc to this policy area.
Nonetheless, some broad types of consistency will be relevant across many 
policy areas. The EU takes ‘consistency’ to mean ‘consistency with precedent’: 
a precaution should be consistent with other policies adopted in the past.K 
But I disagree that this is a fundamental condition, especially in situations 
where the evidential picture is rapidly evolving. It introduces a conservative 
bias into decision- making. Sometimes the right response is to break with 
precedent, justifying the departure by pointing to new evidence, or to reasons 
that were missed by past processes but considered by this one. The consist-
ency requirement should be that breaks with precedent can be justiﬁed, not 
that they cannot happen. If a deliberative process arrives at a view that breaks 
with precedent, they should be informed of the break, and asked to discuss 
whether there are good reasons for it.
It is not just consistency with the past that matters. There is also consist-
ency among the measures being proposed right now, in the present. The 
COVID- 19 pandemic has given us examples of packages of measures, assem-
bled in haste, that were not particularly consistent with each other. Infamously, 
in summer 2020 the UK government introduced an ‘Eat Out to Help Out’ 
scheme encouraging people to return to indoor restaurants, while at the same 
time preparing for a second wave of infections.9L In September, with infec-
tions soaring as predicted, the UK government’s scientiﬁc advisers gently 
stressed that ‘a consistent package of measures should be adopted that does 
not appear to promote contradictory goals’.99
Most subtly of all, there is a sense of consistency that concerns the future: a 
precautionary response to one threat should not create a new threat that may 
be serious enough to warrant trying to undo or cancel out the original pre-
caution. This is the type of consistency highlighted by Steel. Again, the 
COVID- 19 pandemic provided some striking examples. The UK’s advisers 
were acutely aware that a strategy aimed at completely eliminating a respira-
tory virus creates a risk of a new threat: a huge wave as soon as the measures 
are liCed, or as soon as a new, uncontainable variant emerges elsewhere in the 
world. The risk is real, but the UK’s advisers initially took this to be a reason 
against even attempting aggressive suppression of transmission, and this was 
almost certainly an overreaction. They changed their advice when the likely 
consequences of their strategy for hospital admissions were modelled.9:
K European Commission (2000/2006).
9L McKie and Helm (2023).
99 Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (2020b).
9: These events are recounted and analysed in Birch (2021a).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
