AVOIDI() TH, T­.A((­ O/ ,01,.T VA23,4 
567
them on many evaluative questions, while deferring on scientiﬁc matters. For 
example, they were perceptive about the potential for genome editing to serve 
the interests of corporations rather than consumers or animals. They could 
see how the ‘poster children’ of genome editing, such as genome editing for 
disease resistance, might be used to cement a trend towards intensiﬁcation 
that ought instead to be reversed. They could see the real issue at stake was an 
evaluative one about the sort of relationship we, the human population, want 
to have towards the animals in our care. Their conclusions, as transcribed by 
the organizers, were sensible and well reasoned.8
I was le9 not just with a positive view of the feasibility of a citizen’s panel 
on a scientiﬁcally complex issue, but also with a sense of the distinctive value 
of such panels. Sometimes the public’s perspective can be a valuable cor rect-
ive to expert biases. Soon a9er the dialogue, the Nuﬃeld Council published 
an expert report on the same issue. The report repeatedly describes current 
methods of intensive animal farming as ‘entrenched’, and their entrenchment 
is given as a reason to think about editing animals to ﬁt their conditions 
rather than modifying the conditions to ﬁt the needs of the animal.: I think 
the public, not the experts, are in a stronger position to judge what is truly 
entrenched. Citizens’ panels can be an invaluable way of breaking through 
the sort of groupthink that leads panels of experts to rule out certain types of 
societal change as unfeasible.
I will use the terms ‘citizens’ panel’ and ‘citizens’ assembly’ interchangeably 
in this book. The former usually connotes a somewhat smaller group (less 
than 100) and the latter a somewhat larger group (at least 100), but the di;er-
ence will not play an important role in my arguments. I think panels/assemblies 
should ideally have at least 150 members but still have value, and for the same 
basic reasons, when smaller.
7.2 Avoiding the Tyranny of Expert Values
Why are citizens’ panels valuable? The need to avoid groupthink is one 
rationale, but a fairly shallow one. Yes, they may help with that problem, but 
perhaps a suitably large and diverse panel of experts would also be able to 
avoid groupthink. Is there also a deeper rationale?
8 Nuﬃeld Council on Bioethics (2021b, 2022).
: Nuﬃeld Council on Bioethics (2021a, p. 83).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
