-./ ,OA(: A D4/AA2-BONA4N O4A3/WO4) 
8P
1.5 The Goal: A Precautionary Framework
I could have written an inert discussion of abstract questions, ﬂoating past 
real- world decisions at a great distance. But I did not want to write that book. 
This book starts with the urgency of real life— matters of life and death that 
confront us all— and tries to ﬁnd ways to decide, ways to agree.
The motto of my approach is ‘no magic tricks’. We start in a position of hor-
rible, disorienting, apparently inescapable uncertainty about other minds, 
and then . . . the uncertainty is still there at the end. Sorry, it is inescapable. 
Anyone who tells you otherwise is not being honest or has not properly faced 
up to the problem. I am not in the business of selling magical escape routes 
from uncertainty. My aim is to construct a framework that allows us to reach 
collective decisions despite our uncertainty: decisions that command our 
conﬁdence and reﬂect our shared values.
At the core of the framework is the thought that we need to ﬁnd ways to err 
on the side of caution in these cases. The risks of over- attributing and under- 
attributing sentience are not equal. When we deny the sentience of sentient 
beings, acting as if they felt nothing, we tend to do them terrible harms. We 
are oEen responsible for those harms even though they were unintended, 
because our actions were negligent or reckless. Think here of Kate Bainbridge. 
The lack of any intention to cause psychological trauma on the part of her 
doctors does not mean they acted properly. Meanwhile, when we treat non- 
sentient beings as if they were sentient, we may still do some harm (if the 
precautions we take are very costly and time- consuming and distract our 
attention away from other cases), but the harms are oEen much less serious 
and of a di;erent, more controllable kind.
In other contexts (especially in discussions of the environment and public 
health), this type of idea is sometimes called ‘the precautionary principle’. But 
the logic of my framework is not the following: ‘the precautionary principle’ 
is the correct general decision rule, so we must apply it to this particular set of 
decision problems. That is not what I’m saying. The idea is rather that the 
asymmetry of risk that stares us in the face when we think about cases at the 
edge of sentience presents us with strong and obvious reasons to start think-
ing about precautions, independently of whether this is also a good way to 
approach other policy challenges. The motivation for erring on the side of 
caution here is ‘bottom- up’—it comes from reﬂecting on the asymmetries of 
risk that jump out at us in these speciﬁc cases— rather than ‘top- down’, ﬂow-
ing from some high- level commitment to some general truth called ‘the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
