6C 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
Russellian Monism
Dissatisfaction with both materialism and dualism has led to something of a 
revival, in recent decades, of panpsychist thinking.34 In its contemporary 
form (‘Russellian monism’, a4er Bertrand Russell)3H this is not the view that 
all the elements of human consciousness can be found inside fundamental 
particles. No one is suggesting that quarks consciously re5ect or deliberate 
(‘I’m tired of being uranium, fancy trying lead?’). The idea is that the most 
puzzling elements of conscious experience— the sources of the explanatory 
gap and hard problem— can be found in a simple form in at least some funda-
mental particles. What counts as a simple form is then up for debate. The situ-
ation is further complicated by ‘panprotopsychism’, the less radical view that, 
although even the basic elements of conscious experience are not there in 
fundamental particles, some important precursors to those properties are 
there, at least partially removing the mystery of why complex, organized 
assemblies of those particles can generate full- blown consciousness.
Both panpsychism and panprotopsychism face the challenge of explaining 
how vast multitudes of ‘micro- experiences’ (or ‘micro- proto- experiences’) in 
fundamental particles combine to form the single, uniﬁed ‘macro- experience’ 
or ‘macro- conscious state’ of a whole sentient being. In other words, pan-
psych ists need to solve the so- called combination problem.3I In so far as 
plaus ible approaches to this problem give a special role to the integrative 
properties of the embodied nervous systems of animals, the view can some-
times end up resembling single- kind materialism, at least as far as the distri-
bution of sentience is concerned.
I do not support any version of Russellian monism myself, but I regard the 
views in this family as having a place in the zone of reasonable disagreement. 
They can be distinguished from completely unreasonable views that involve 
ascribing consciousness in something like its evolved, human form to or din-
ary material objects. The caricature of panpsychism that involves attributing 
pleasures and pains to rocks really is unreasonable, because it requires us to 
ignore all the hallmarks of a long evolutionary history in pains and pleasures, 
a history that links them tightly to the biological needs of living organisms 
(see James’s evolutionary argument against epiphenomenalism, discussed in 
§3.2). But Russellian monists are not committed to pains in rocks.
34 See the articles collected in Alter and Nagasawa (2015); Brüntrup and Jaskolla (2017); Seager 
(2019).
3H Russell (1927/1992).
3I Chalmers (2017).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
