;C 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
3.7 Are There Borderline (Indeterminate)  
Cases of Sentience?
There is an axis of philosophical disagreement we have not yet considered. 
This book is called The Edge of Sentience, but an edge can be sharp or blurred. 
Think of transitional processes of various kinds: waking from sleep, emerging 
from a coma or from general anaesthesia, a fetus developing sentience in the 
womb, or a lineage evolving sentience over millions of years. In all these 
cases, we face the question of whether there is a sudden jump from the com-
plete absence of phenomenal consciousness to its presence in at least a min-
imal form— a ‘lights on’ moment— or a gradual transition with a region of 
borderline cases in which there is no determinate fact of the matter about 
whether phenomenal consciousness is present or absent. On this second 
view, the metaphor of the light switch is no longer appropriate (not even a 
dimmer switch, because a dimmer switch still has a sharp transition from o! 
to on). The transition is more like the transition from being non- bald to bald, 
or young to old, where there is no sharp threshold, no single moment at 
which the transition happens.HO
The transitions just listed are very di!erent from each other, and we do not 
need to take the same view about all of them. For example, one could consist-
ently think that the transition from non- conscious to conscious life over evolu-
tionary time involved borderline cases, while also thinking that transitions in 
individual humans, such as the transition from dreamless sleep to wakefulness, 
are sharp, or vice versa. We should, however, feel some pressure to be consistent 
about processes that do resemble each other at the neurophysiological level, 
such as emerging from general anaesthesia and emerging from a coma.IP
Let us think for now about the evolutionary transition (while bearing in 
mind that very similar issues will arise in relation to the other transitions). 
Here, both views are reasonable, given current evidence. The idea of a sharp 
boundary may initially sound absurd, because it may sound as though it 
involves positing a sudden jump from no consciousness at all to conscious-
ness in its rich, complex, human form. That would involve adaptive complex-
ity arising from nowhere, but this is not what anyone is proposing. The idea is 
rather that there may be a sharp boundary between the absence of conscious-
ness and its presence in an extremely minimal and simple form. This is 
HO Substantial discussions of this issue include Papineau (1993, ch. 4); Antony (2006, 2008); Birch 
(2021b); Godfrey- Smith (2020a, 2020b, 2021); Simon (2017); Schwitzgebel (2021); Hall (2022); Tye 
(2021).
IP On the similarities, see E. N. Brown et al. (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
