.U22AR5 ,1 C3A-(0R P 
76E
beneath the surface of apparently factual information, such as the value- 
judgements implicit in a measure of well- being or a cost- beneﬁt analysis.
Second, I think philosophers have a valuable role in the wider conversation 
around the management of risk, outside of any particular decision- making 
mechanism. In cases where we think a risk has been unreasonably neglected, 
we can highlight the risk and explain why it deserves consideration. We can 
also propose responses that we believe would stand a good chance of passing 
the tests of proportionality, if an inclusive, democratic procedure were cre-
ated to apply those tests. Any citizen is free to make proposals, so the philoso-
pher does not have any special privileges here. The distinctive value of our 
proposals— if there is any— lies in the analytical precision we can apply to 
their formulation.
This vision of ‘philosopher- as- proposer’ has also been advocated power-
fully by Philip Kitcher.9F It is the role I will be stepping into in the rest of this 
book, when making proposals about speciﬁc issues at the edge of sentience. 
My proposals will be simply that: proposals. I hope they will provoke discus-
sion, and I believe they would stand a good chance of being judged propor-
tionate by an inclusive deliberative process.
I admit this is, on the face of it, a step down from the pedestal of 
philosopher- as- sage. The problem is that we cannot stand on that pedestal 
without making dubious assertions about our special access to secret facts. 
We must stand up for the importance of the limited expertise we do have, 
without claiming for ourselves a kind of occult expertise over matters of how 
to live.
8.6 Summary of Chapter 8
This chapter has set out a procedure for debating proportionality. In this 
procedure, a citizens’ panel deliberates following the structure laid out 
inDFigure 8.2.
The panel is presented with a shortlist of feasible options on which stake-
holders have been openly consulted. To each policy option, the panel applies 
four tests in sequence: permissibility- in- principle, adequacy, reasonable 
necessity, and consistency (Table 8.1). Proposals that fail a test are set aside. 
Proposals that pass all four tests are judged proportionate.
9F Kitcher (2011b, 2011a).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
