5K0 
I(VO2VI() TH, 13B2I?
which a minority opinion was narrowly edged out. It seems not just im plaus-
ible but also anti- democratic to suggest that members of the population who 
endorse that minority opinion ought to vote against their own view in a refer-
endum, simply because that view was overruled in one microcosm of the 
population.:C
The objection is powerful, and yet I think its force depends partly on the 
radical nature of the example. A law mandating veganism would indeed be 
radical, and miles away from any overlapping consensus that currently exists, 
and that is why it would never be appropriate to defer to a panel. The process 
I am proposing here is more carefully circumscribed. We start from a point of 
overlapping consensus: it is appropriate to take proportionate steps to guard 
against the risk of causing su;ering to sentience candidates. We face the prob-
lem that there is no consensus around what steps are proportionate. We have 
good reasons for not routinely putting such questions to referendums, 
because the issues are scientiﬁcally complex and require expert input. We also 
have good reasons for taking them partially outside the normal run of elect-
or al politics, since elected representatives do not have suﬃcient incentive to 
give these questions the sustained attention they need. This is a special set of 
circumstances in which elected representatives do have good reason to defer 
to the recommendations of a citizens’ panel, as long as the recommendations 
are compatible with the elected representatives’ core policy commitments.
That last qualiﬁcation raises the possibility of a situation where a citizens’ 
panel recommends something that elected representatives cannot implement 
without violating a core policy commitment. Suppose, for example, that a 
panel recommends a moratorium on AI as proportionate, when the govern-
ment has a democratic mandate to invest in AI as part of its core economic 
platform. This is the type of situation where a referendum would be war-
ranted as a last- resort way of resolving what is evidently too deep a conﬂict of 
values within society to be resolved by a mere panel. A serious attempt at a 
one- o; national conversation would be justiﬁed.
Competence
Perhaps the most obvious problem with citizens’ panels, when the issue at 
stake is scientiﬁcally and philosophically complex, is competence. How are 
:C Landemore appears to concede a surprising amount to Lafont’s criticism when she writes that 
assemblies (or ‘mini- publics’) need to be ‘ultimately connected to an authorization moment and 
sometimes, though not necessarily always, a referendum down the line’, adding that they should not 
be ‘making the decisions on momentous issues’ (Landemore 2020, p. 116).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
