,E502.() 2( (2HE, /,EC012.()0,4 .6E03 
%M7
for conclusive evidence to emerge. We should be ready to act to manage risks 
before conclusive evidence is in.
The framework I have been assembling clearly belongs in that family. 
Framework Principle 2 explicitly says that ‘we ought to reach a policy deci-
sion rather than leaving the matter unresolved indeﬁnitely’, an endorsement 
of Steel’s proposed norm. Indeed, even if one thinks Steel’s norm might not 
always be a good norm for policy- making, it seems clearly a good norm for 
policy- making at the edge of sentience, where the zone of reasonable dis-
agree ment is so wide that we are unlikely to have conclusive evidence any 
time soon, and yet the risks of simply refusing to think about these issues 
until conclusive evidence is attained are enormous and unacceptable.
The framework I have been developing also makes three other commit-
ments that are shared with many other precautionary principles. The ﬁrst is 
that precautions should pass a test of proportionality. We should not ban any 
human activity at the ﬁrst sign it creates a risk of harm but should instead 
start a debate about what would be proportionate. I see this commitment to 
proportionality as marking the diﬀerence between radical precautionary 
principles that aim to ban activities on a hair- trigger (which invariably fail to 
achieve consensus support) and plausible, moderate precautionary principles 
that aim to manage risk sensibly (and can achieve consensus support). My 
framework is a precautionary framework of the second, moderate type.
The second commitment is that discussions about proportionality should 
be inclusive, reaching beyond a narrow community of experts to involve the 
wider public. That too has been an important strand in precautionary think-
ing in other contexts. And the third commitment is that we should intention-
ally set a low evidential bar for triggering discussions about proportionality. 
Evidence that is far from conclusive can still be enough to bring a possibility 
within the zone of reasonable disagreement, so that a discussion about pro-
portionality is warranted. That does not mean that the strength of the evi-
dence is irrelevant or that weak evidence can be used to justify radical policy 
responses. If the evidence for the existence of a risk is credible but thin, this is 
something that expert advisers should honestly communicate (e.g. with 
phrases such as ‘low conﬁdence’ and ‘remote chance’), and it is something an 
inclusive, democratic process for assessing proportionality should take into 
account.
For all these reasons, the framework I have constructed can fairly be called a 
precautionary framework. Yet an important qualiﬁcation needs to be added: the 
justiﬁcation I have given for my proposals is free- standing, not dependent on the 
justiﬁcations of other precautionary principles. It is logically possible for a 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
