./) 2)A+-1.-4 (O11-:-+-.Y O3 4O5.-56-5G JA+)54)0 
%7L
9.3 The Realistic Possibility of Continuing Valenced 
Experience in the PVS
The most discussed cases of covert consciousness involve patients who retain 
an ability to perform cognitive tasks despite lacking the ability to convert 
their thoughts into motor responses. Detecting cognitive- motor dissociation 
is extremely challenging, and high rates of false negatives and false positives 
are very likely. When a patient diagnoses as in the PVS ‘fails’ a cognitive task 
in a brain scanner, that must not be counted as strong evidence against covert 
consciousness. This is a point of agreement.
But one of the questions that looms largest for patients’ families concerns 
aﬀect rather than cognition. Can the patient su!er? Can they still feel pain, 
pleasure, distress, anxiety, joy, relief? Here we have to contend with the pos-
sibility of covert valenced experience, a capacity that may well not correlate 
very well at all with a continuing ability to perform cognitive tasks.
Could the capacity to have valenced experiences survive the extensive cor-
tical damage that leads to PVS? There are sometimes outward signs that cause 
patients’ families to suspect it could. As already noted, patients in the PVS can 
smile, grimace, cry, grunt, groan. It is no surprise that family members oAen 
read these behaviours as suggesting residual a!ective states.
In 1994, 8ve major American societies in the areas of neurology and paedi-
at rics convened a multi- society task force to agree a consensus statement on 
the PVS. In a section on ‘pain and su!ering’, the task force con8dently 
reported that ‘conscious awareness of pain or the experience of su!ering 
occurs at a cortical level through synapses connecting parietal cortical 
neuro ns with other areas of the cerebral cortex’. The evidence, it claimed, 
supported ‘the belief that patients in a persistent vegetative state are unaware 
and insensate and therefore lack the cerebral cortical capacity to be conscious 
of pain’.1H
This is a problematic statement, not because the view is inherently unrea-
sonable but because it is expressed with such excessive con8dence. At a time 
when the search for the neural correlates of conscious experience was clearly 
in its infancy (and one might argue it is still in its infancy), a task force of 
neurologists and paediatricians considered themselves to have solved the 
problem to a suﬃcient degree of certainty to report their view without quali-
8cation in a major consensus statement intended to guide clinical practice. 
The idea that conscious experience requires global cortical activity is still a 
1H The Multi- Society Task Force on PVS (1994, p. 1576).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
