),U?C0) ,F ?I)A L 
30O
workspace, we must downplay the aspects of the global workspace just 
mentioned, since the local processors, though providing input in a range of 
modalities, are not specialized in sensory, motor, evaluative, and mnemonic 
functions. There is, admittedly, a form of ‘attention’, whereby the most rele-
vant statistical connections between (for example) diﬀerent words are se lect-
ive ly ampli2ed, and indeed this selective ampli2cation lies at the heart of the 
capabilities of transformers. Yet this form of attention ‘has only loose connec-
tions to how attention is conceptualised in neuroscience’.44 Attention in the 
brain is usually considered to have a top- down element, relying on recurrent 
connections between higher and lower parts of processing hierarchies, and 
these recurrent connections are absent in transformers.
There is also no broadcast as such in this architecture, let alone global 
broadcast.46 The output is always to a speci2c output module, even though 
any one of a range of output modules may be selected. At the core of the 
global workspace theory is a special type of recurrent processing— the work-
space broadcasts back to the local processors that provide it with input— and 
this is absent in transformers, as is recurrent processing more generally. 
Ironically, transformers, for their remarkable linguistic abilities, appear to 
have moved the AI industry away from architectures more closely inspired by 
the brain and more likely to recreate architectures like the global workspace. 
Whereas many earlier forms of AI involved recurrent processing of various 
kinds, transformers do not.
That said, it is not clear that any aspect of the global workspace architec-
ture is inherently diﬃcult to implement computationally. If AI researchers 
deliberately try to replicate all its key features, there is no reason to think they 
will fail. Our working group could 2nd ‘no obvious technical barriers’ to rec-
reating a minimal global workspace in AI.47 We felt this was something that 
could be achieved very soon.
The situation is more complicated regarding Hakwan Lau’s ‘perceptual 
reality monitoring’ theory of consciousness.49 On the face of it, this looks 
even easier to recreate than a global workspace: it just requires sensory pro-
cessing, plus a second unit that looks in on the sensory processing, classify-
ing the sensory representations as reliable representations of the present 
external world, as internally generated, or as noise. That classi2cation task is 
44 Butlin et al. (2023, p. 28). The work of one of our team members, Grace Lindsay, was particularly 
important here (Lindsay 2020).
46 Butlin et al. (2023, p. 60).
47 Butlin et al. (2023). See also VanRullen and Kanai (2021) and Goyal et al. (2022).
49 Lau (2022).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
