-./ ,OA(: A D4/AA2-BONA4N O4A3/WO4) 
86
My framework aspires to generality, but it also tries not to lose sight of the 
great di;erences between cases at the edge of sentience. There is a question of 
taste when humans with brain injuries are discussed in the same book as 
non- human animals. It raises the question: are you drawing an equivalence 
between the two cases? Are you saying that a brain injury can render a person 
less than human? That is not what I am saying at all. I think my repeated dis-
avowals of it will make that clear enough. I am not claiming that there is a 
moral equivalence between these cases, or that our obligations towards an 
injured person are the same as our obligations towards other animals. 
Sensitivity to the vast di;erences between these cases is absolutely crucial.
What these cases do have in common is a resemblance in our state of 
uncertainty when we, as decision- makers, are forced to choose what to do. We 
must somehow move from horrible, vertiginous uncertainty to action. Our 
actions will have consequences, those consequences will depend on facts we 
are not in a position to know, and we may never know what the consequences 
were, even in hindsight. In all these cases, we feel a general imperative to err 
on the side of caution but are leE wondering what erring on the side of cau-
tion requires of us. What precautions must we take and why? Is it possible 
toGgo too far in the direction of taking precautions and, if it is, where are 
theGlimits?
Once we see that our predicament has this common shape across all cases 
at the edge of sentience, it raises the hope that there might be versatile, trans-
ferrable insights about how to handle that type of predicament: how to move 
from uncertainty to action, how to adopt an appropriately precautionary 
 attitude. It is in that spirit that I am bringing these cases together in the 
sameGbook.
Parts I and II of the book will gradually assemble the pieces of an adequate 
precautionary framework. As I see it, a good framework for designing public 
policy should ideally be based on what John Rawls called overlapping con-
sensus: principles that all reasonable people, for all their diversity and dis-
agree ment, can endorse for the right reasons.!8 But to ﬁnd principles all 
reasonable people could get behind, we ﬁrst need to understand what sen-
tience is and why there is so much disagreement about it in the ﬁrst place— 
and which views in that space of disagreement are reasonable and which are 
not. There is a very wide ‘zone of reasonable disagreement’, and a good 
framework for making decisions will respect all the views that lie within that 
!8 Rawls (1993). Wol; (2020) has emphasized the wide relevance of the ‘overlapping consensus’ 
concept to public policy challenges, including challenges concerning non- human animals.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
