8..)CT0M) /-8C) 
KN
Yet we o6en have feelings that overﬂow even an expanded emotional 
vocabulary. In the COVID- 19 pandemic, when cases were rising, I found 
myself experiencing a form of dread associated with the diﬀuse, spiralling 
consequences that were looming over all of us, as a collective— I found I had 
no word for this ‘wave dread’. When I attend animal welfare conferences, 
I o6en !nd myself experiencing a feeling that combines horror at the harms 
humans inﬂict on animals with admiration for those on the frontline of try-
ing to reduce those harms, plus excitement at the progress they are making— I 
have no word for this either. One of my favourite feelings of all is that of being 
absorbed in writing— another feeling with no word of its own.
I can point to these feelings, and describe their typical causes and eﬀects, 
but I cannot capture them in words. Indeed, when I introspect my own feel-
ings, I seem to !nd something unclassi!able about as o6en as I !nd some-
thing I can label. Feelings are akin to fragrances: you can look up what the 
main ‘accords’ are supposed to be in a particular perfume, but these attempts 
at description capture very little of what it actually feels like— they are crude 
!eld guides— and so it is with feeling.
If our ordinary concepts do not even allow us to describe our own feelings 
without missing a lot, we should not expect them to do well at describing the 
sentience of other beings. We should not ﬂip straight to the other extreme and 
conclude that terms like ‘fear’ and ‘anger’ have no reference at all when 
applied to other animals. They may well do, but our default stance should be 
one of humility. We must accept that the feelings of other sentient beings are 
very likely to overﬂow any attempt to categorize them with everyday emotion 
concepts. Because of this, it is helpful to abstract away from our particular 
emotion concepts (fear, anger, sadness, etc.), and even from the concept of 
‘emotion’ itself, and work instead with more general concepts that are more 
likely to be applicable to beings very diﬀerent from ourselves.
But what are these more general concepts? In the mid- to late twentieth 
century, researchers in social psychology made a sustained eﬀort to map the 
underlying structure of human emotional language. A landmark in this litera-
ture is James  A.  Russell’s ‘aﬀective circumplex’, which posits that ordinary 
emotion concepts are picking out arcs on a circle in a two- dimensional space, 
where the dimensions are valence and arousal (Fig. 2.2).10 The valence 
dimension runs from misery to pleasure; the arousal dimension runs from 
sleepiness to high arousal. Russell proposed this structure as a ‘model both 
10 J. A. Russell (1980, 2003, 2009). See also Posner et al. (2005, 2009); Yik et al. (2011).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
