)FM 
,-. /0.12.3, /145651,.3
have chosen to look at a wider range of invertebrate animals, given the choice 
(and, in the next chapter, I will). But to repeat, pragmatic reasons have a 
legitimate role. A report with broader scope might have led to some recom-
mendations that were politically impossible to implement, increasing the 
chance of all our recommendations being ignored.
The second concerning aspect is the rather conservative and precedent- 
sensitive nature of our approach. We started with IME criteria and revised 
and updated those criteria in various ways, giving reasons for the changes. 
Here too, there was a pragmatic rationale. Procedures need to command pub-
lic conﬁdence. To throw out the approach taken in the 1990s and start again 
with a blank canvas would have risked undermining conﬁdence in what we 
were doing.
And yet, the IME criteria can be accused of an excessive focus on pain and 
pain- like states. This is obviously the case for criteria such as ‘an animal’s 
response to stimuli that would be painful for a human is functionally similar 
to the human response’. The wording here is unhelpfully vague (as noted 
earlier), but, more fundamentally, there is no strong reason why ‘stimuli that 
would be painful for a human’ are the only stimuli that can provide insight 
into sentience. Even when sentience is deﬁned in its narrower sense as a 
capacity for valenced experience, there is still far more to sentience than just 
pain: pain is just one possible valenced experience among many. Although 
our revised criteria eliminated vague phrases such as ‘stimuli that would be 
painful for a human’, they retained a focus on pain.
This could have led to problematic consequences. As it turned out, there 
was very strong evidence of our pain indicators in octopuses. But suppose 
this had not been the case, simply because scientists had never looked for 
those indicators— what would we have said then? It would surely have been 
appropriate to acknowledge other lines of evidence, such as evidence of play 
behaviour, as relevant to questions of sentience, rather than saying ‘no pain, 
no sentience’.82 I do not think we should try to systematize these ‘other lines 
of evidence’ into an expanded list of criteria (which would become very long 
and unwieldy), but we should in general remain open- minded about relevant 
evidence coming from sources outside the list.
82 On play behaviour in octopuses, see Kuba et al. (2006). On the minds of octopuses more gener-
ally, Jennifer Mather’s (2008, 2019) work is an excellent guide, and Peter Godfrey- Smith’s (2016b, 
2020a) books present the evidence very accessibly. In a fantastic series of papers, Mather has carefully 
applied the ‘dimensions of animal consciousness’ proposed by Birch et al. (2020) to the case of octo-
puses (Mather 2021a, 2021b, 2022a, 2022b). These papers give a sense of just how comprehensive the 
case of sentience in octopuses really is.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
