5KI 
I(VO2VI() TH, 13B2I?
adjudicate scientiﬁc agreements. Yet the edge of sentience presents us with 
questions that blend evaluative and scientiﬁc components, with no sharp 
dividing line. How, given this, can we avoid a situation where citizens are 
forced to adjudicate between di;erent claims to expertise, or one in which 
experts impose their own values?
To meet the challenge in full, we need to lay out a possible procedure 
that a citizens’ panel could follow to reach a judgement about proportionality. 
To defuse worries about competence, the procedure needs to show how 
the labour will be divided between experts and citizens. It must be that 
experts are asked to assess sentience candidature and to provide input on 
matters within their expertise but are not expected to resolve deep value 
conﬂicts. Meanwhile, ordinary citizens must be asked to reach judgements 
about proportionality, drawing on the knowledge they collectively possess 
regarding human values, needs and priorities, but are not expected to 
resolve scientiﬁc disagreements. The task of the next chapter is to propose 
such a procedure.
7.5 Summary of Chapter 7
A ‘tyranny of expert values’ occurs when the values of expert advisers deter-
mine a policy decision without those values being properly scrutinized by a 
democratic process. Citizens’ panels and assemblies, composed of random 
samples of the wider population, can be an attractive way to avoid the tyranny 
of expert values, when carefully designed.
Citizens’ panels can have advantages over elected assemblies and referen-
dums. These advantages are especially clear when an issue generates deep 
value conﬂicts, requires sustained attention and regular revisiting, requires 
consideration of the interests of beings who cannot vote, and when there are 
reasons to departisanize the issue. Questions of proportionality at the edge of 
sentience have all of these properties.
To be adequately representative, citizens’ panels/assemblies should be size-
able (at least 150 citizens) but should ﬁssion into smaller groups of 10–25 for 
deliberation. They should have the power to co- opt new members to ensure 
that important but marginalized perspectives are represented in every delib-
erative group.
Elected assemblies should not defer to citizens’ panels in all circumstances. 
In cases where a panel makes a recommendation that contradicts the core 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
