;4 
T() M+,­-./­0 12/.3)M
comes in degrees or that we should expect to vary by degrees across species. 
IIT also suggests a sharp boundary (a system is either a local maximum of Ф 
or it is not), as does Nicholas Humphrey’s theory.II Humphrey posits a link 
between conscious experience and a feedback loop linking sensory, evalu-
ative, motor, and self- monitoring brain regions, and argues that the comple-
tion of such a feedback loop is a sharp matter: there either is or is not such 
a loop.
The sharp boundary view, then, is a reasonable one to hold in our current 
state of uncertainty. But the deep gradualist view is also reasonable, and the 
reasons sometimes given for dismissing it are unconvincing. It has sometimes 
been said that borderline cases of phenomenal consciousness are in con ceiv-
able and therefore impossible.IK By what standard are they inconceivable? I 
take the claim to concern what Thomas Nagel has called ‘sympathetic imagi-
nation’: the imaginative mode in which we ﬁrst- personally project ourselves 
into another subjective point of view.IL Critics of the deep gradualist view 
argue that it is impossible to sympathetically imagine a borderline case that is 
neither determinately conscious nor determinately non- conscious, and that 
this imaginative failure counts against the possibility of such a state.
I agree that our attempts to imagine a borderline case sympathetically 
always fail: they always result in imagining a state that is determinately con-
scious. When we try to imagine borderline cases, our ﬁrst thought is to 
im agine barely perceptible stimuli. But there is, determinately, something it’s 
like to have an auditory experience of a sound so quiet you aren’t sure if you 
heard it at all. There is, determinately, something it’s like to have a visual 
experience of a stimulus that 5ashes up so brie5y you aren’t sure whether you 
saw it or not. So, when we imagine these situations sympathetically, we are 
imagining determinately conscious states. The stimuli that produce these 
experiences may constitute borderline cases of audibility or visibility. 
However, the experiences are not borderline cases of phenomenal conscious-
ness. They are clearly conscious.IO
However, failures of sympathetic imagination do not imply impossibility. 
This can be seen by considering Nagel’s example of a bat echolocating. When 
an animal possesses a sensory ability that we lack, the result is a failure of 
sympathetic imagination: we cannot imagine what it’s like to be that animal. 
But this failure is no reason to think it impossible that other animals have 
sensory experiences associated with these sensory abilities.
II Humphrey (2022).
IK Antony (2006); Simon (2017); Tye (2021).
IL Nagel (1974).
IO A point made by Papineau (1993) and Tye (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
