2A 
T() CO,C)-T O. /),T0),C)
or reﬂection, and they could conceivably be entirely devoid of content. For 
example, Simona Ginsburg and Eva Jablonka have speculated that the earliest 
nerve nets may have crackled with a contentless form of raw feeling— a sort of 
‘white noise’, the experiential equivalent of static on a TV screen.11
Sentience in this sense of the word— the capacity for phenomenal con-
sciousness, with or without sapience or sel?ood— does not imply a cap-
acity for pain or pleasure. A being could be sentient in this sense and yet 
have experiences that feel neither bad nor good to it. In bioethics, animal 
ethics, animal law, and animal welfare research, the term ‘sentience’ has 
come to be used in a deliberately narrower way. In these areas, it usually 
refers to the capacity for conscious experiences that feel bad or feel good to 
the subject. White noise alone would not count as sentience, on this de! n-
ition, unless it also feels good or feels bad to the subject. The property of 
‘feeling bad or feeling good to the subject’ is called valence (or hedonic 
tone). Sentience, in this narrower sense, speci!cally concerns conscious 
experiences with valence, whether positive (feels good) or negative (feels 
bad), or some combination of the two.
In the rest of this book, I will be using the term ‘sentience’ in this deliber-
ately narrower sense:
A sentient being (in the sense relevant to the present framework) is a 
system with the capacity to have valenced experiences, such as experiences 
of pain and pleasure.
‘Experience’ as used here, implies ‘phenomenal consciousness’. The de!nition 
has two parts: the ‘experience’ part and the ‘valence’ part. Sentience, in our 
sense, requires both. But it implies neither sapience nor sel?ood. Figure 2.1 
maps out the relevant conceptual terrain.
With any de!nition, one can ask, of the terms used in the de!nition, ‘but 
what does that mean?’ There comes a point at which this game becomes 
counterproductive. But I think one round is fair. It is reasonable to ask: what 
is meant by ‘phenomenal consciousness’? What is meant by ‘valence’? Say 
more! And what motivates including both properties in the de!nition, not 
just one?
11 Ginsburg and Jablonka (2007).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
