TH( )AUT,-.A/0 TA1( -2 .(34-/. 5A,. 
678
At the same time, evidence was mounting to support Lawson’s arguments. 
The anaesthesiologist K.9J.9S.9Anand, then a doctoral student at Oxford, led a 
randomized controlled trial to compare neonatal stress responses to surgery 
under light and deep anaesthesia, ﬁnding a ‘massive stress response . . . three 
to ﬁve times greater than adults’ when only light anaesthesia was used.: Quite 
apart from the possibility of pain, this physiological stress response in itself 
posed serious risks to newborns. The work provoked a storm of public con-
troversy in the UK.; Initial reports targeted Anand, failing to recognize that 
Anand was investigating the eﬀects of a widely used surgical approach, not 
deliberately withholding anaesthesia beyond clinical norms.
In 1987, American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Society of 
Anesthesiology responded with a joint statement recommending the use of 
anaesthesia and analgesia in neonates, which they described as ‘relatively 
safe’.4 Although the AAP/ASA statement did not explicitly using the language 
of precaution, there was clearly an element of precautionary thinking in the 
background. They could have insisted that the available evidence concerned 
nociception rather than pain, and that further proof of pain experience was 
needed. By Anand and Hickey’s own lights, the evidence primarily concerned 
nociception and physiological stress responses, leaving room for doubt about 
accompanying conscious experiences of pain (since there is always room for 
doubt). Anand and Hickey’s review even contains something close to a dis-
claimer at the beginning: ‘Strictly speaking, nociceptive activity, rather than 
pain, should be discussed with regard to the neonate, because pain is a sensa-
tion with strong emotional associations’.5 They even add that ‘none of the data 
cited herein tell us whether neonatal nociceptive activity and associated 
responses are experienced subjectively’.6 The door is lef open for a critic to 
say: nociception, yes, but not necessarily with any accompanying conscious 
experience. Thankfully, the AAP and ASA did not take that path.
A signiﬁcant body of evidence accumulated since the 1980s conﬁrms that 
the AAP and ASA made the right call.? The challenges of inferring pain from 
measurable indicators have not gone away, leading to continuing debate 
about which kinds of pain relief are eﬀective and why.8 But this debate now 
takes place against a backdrop of universal acceptance of the need for 
: Anand and Hickey (1987).
; McGrath (2011).
4 American Academy of Pediatrics (1987); Boﬀey (1987).
5 Anand and Hickey (1987, p. 1321).
6 Anand and Hickey (1987, p. 1326).
? Pain- related evidence is reviewed by Campbell- Yeo et al. (2022); McPherson et al. (2020, 2021). 
On evidence for consciousness in infants more generally, see Bayne et al. (2023) and Passos- Ferreira 
(in press).
8 Fitzgerald (2015).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
