­+6782))+,8 2)76/,7.30 7./9T 6),T+),:) 
4;
You would ask them: what evidence is there that points credibly to a bac-
ter ium ever feeling pain? What evidence is there that points credibly to anti-
bacterial agents, in particular, being experienced as painful? What evidence is 
there to suggest that orange juice works as an anaesthetic for bacteria? They 
would either be unable to answer or else they would present you with dubi-
ous evidence that did not meet scientiﬁc norms, and you would rightly reject 
that purported evidence.
What would you say next? In your place, I think I would say something 
like this:
Sorry, but these are serious matters. You are recommending a change to my 
way of life. It is not reasonable to do that without credible supporting evi-
dence. If evidence were not required, I could equally well tell you to always 
wear gloves on Tuesdays, because gloves give bacteria intense pleasure, but 
only on Tuesdays. The game of evidence- free speculation has no rules, no 
constraints. It can be reasonable to speculate sometimes, in the right time 
and the right place, but to make a practical recommendation on the basis of 
pure speculation is unreasonable.
If you agree with that general line of thought, you will probably ﬁnd a lot to 
agree with in the rest of the book. A recurring theme is that, in the absence of 
certainty, it is still possible and, moreover, extremely important to base 
re com menda tions on evidence that favours the recommended course of 
action over relevant alternatives.
Dogmatism
In Descartes’s time, disciplinary divisions were much less entrenched than 
they are now. As a ‘natural philosopher’, Descartes roamed across mathemat-
ics, physics, philosophy, and indeed physiology, where he made signiﬁcant 
contributions.2 One of Descartes’s motivations for studying neuroanatomy 
was to ﬁnd the place where conscious experience slipped inside the workings 
of the brain. He proposed the pineal gland as the most plausible location 
(Fig. 3.1).3 In the human brain, this is a small structure right in the centre. 
2 T. H. Huxley (1874) opens the essay in which he introduces the idea of epiphenomenalism with a 
long tribute to Descartes’s contributions to neurophysiology.
3 See Lokhorst (2021) for a wonderful overview of the history of this theory.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
