)F 
ET,-./ 012 3E4-5-61
4.4 Rationality-centric Views
There is an orthodox Kantian view (very diﬀerent from Korsgaard’s neo- 
Kantian view) on which sentience is insuﬃcient for moral standing.12 
Kant’s own ethical framework assigns fundamental value to rational beings, 
where ‘rational’ is understood in a demanding sense, implying a strong form 
of autonomy.17 One can doubt whether even members of the species Homo 
sapiens truly possess autonomy in Kant’s sense, because it seems to require 
the independence of the will from the laws of nature. In any case, non- human 
animals are not autonomous in this sense, and so, for Kant, they have no fun-
damental worth. Suppose, for example, you torture a dog. You have not, in 
Kant’s view, violated any obligations you owe to the dog. You have done the 
dog no wrong. A dog is not the sort of thing that can be wronged. For some 
critics, this is such an awful result it warrants immediate rejection of the view.18
Kant himself was not entirely content with this result. In the Metaphysics of 
Morals, he suggests an escape route: we may not owe obligations to animals, 
but we can have obligations in regard to animals that we owe to ourselves. 
The idea is that, in torturing animals, killing them inhumanely, hunting them 
for sport, or treating them without gratitude, one acts without due respect for 
one’s own humanity. Why? Because mistreating animals dulls one’s ‘shared 
feeling of their suﬀering and so weakens and gradually uproots a natural pre-
disposition that is very serviceable to morality in one’s relations with other 
human beings’.15
The general line of thought can be traced back to Thomas Aquinas, who 
remarked that ‘it is evident that if a man practice a pitiable aﬀection for ani-
mals, he is all the more disposed to take pity on his fellow men’.1? However, 
Kant’s position was not simply that in mistreating animals I make myself 
more likely to wrong other people. It was rather that, in mistreating animals, 
I  violate a duty I owe to myself by weakening my disposition for ‘shared 
12 My discussion of this issue is based on Birch (2020b).
17 A rationality- centric outlook on ethics does not have to be combined with such a demanding 
view of rationality. There is room for views that link moral status to much more minimal kinds of 
rationality, more likely to be shared with many other animals (Thomas 2018).
18 A line of criticism pressed by Broadie and Pybus (1974); Regan (1983/2004); and Skidmore 
(2001).
15 Kant (1797/2017, 6:433).
1? The context is deeply disappointing for anyone hoping to ﬁnd in Aquinas any genuine compas-
sion for other animals. He adds: ‘Consequently the Lord, in order to inculcate pity to the Jewish 
 people, who were prone to cruelty, wished them to practice pity even with regard to dumb animals, 
and forbade them to do certain things savoring of cruelty to animals’ (Aquinas 1947, Treatise on Law, 
Q102).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
