A -RAG2A()C ANA/5.). ,1 -R,-,R(),NA/)(5 
767
For example, in 2018 the EU banned three speciﬁc neonicotinoid pesticides 
that were credibly linked to colony collapse in bees.H There was a case for going 
beyond a ban on these speciﬁc pesticides by banning all neonicotinoids, or 
even all synthetic pesticides. But tacking on these additional measures was 
thought to be excessive in relation to the speciﬁc threat that was identiﬁed.
Let us not get into in the details of whether this was the right decision. 
Perhaps the limited measures taken did not really do enough to bring the risk 
down to an acceptable level. Perhaps policy- makers should have gone further. 
If a citizens’ panel had been consulted, ordinary citizens might have recom-
mended stronger measures than those actually taken. My aim is not to take 
sides on this but to illustrate the general kind of debate that should be had 
regarding excessiveness. I am proposing a procedure, not a decision rule, so 
the results in particular cases cannot be pre- judged.
If any cost/risk/harm- beneﬁt analyses of the diﬀerent options have been 
conducted, the results, presented accessibly, can be used as expert inputs to 
discussions of adequacy and reasonable necessity. These methods of analysis 
do have a place in a good procedure. What I oppose is the use of these  methods 
to resolve value conﬂict. We should never allow the value- judgements and 
subjective probabilities implicit in these analyses to dictate the policy response, 
without proper deliberation and scrutiny.
Test 4: Consistency
Steel has rightly emphasized the importance of consistency to judgements of 
proportionality.I Critics of precautionary thinking have argued that it oCen 
leads to inconsistency— but, to the extent this is true, it reﬂects poor institu-
tional design rather than a deep ﬂaw with the idea of precautionary thinking. 
Good institutional design should make sure that the consistency of the meas-
ures on the table is explicitly and carefully considered.
The relevant kind of consistency will depend on the details of the case. For 
example, when formulating animal welfare policy, we should aim for taxo-
nomic consistency: our treatment of one group of animals (e.g. vertebrates) 
should be consistent with our treatment of another (e.g. invertebrates), in the 
sense that any disparities in the level of welfare protection should be justiﬁed 
H Carrington (2018).
I Steel (2015).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
