2HE ,0)-E (F ,E05.32.C /(33.B.5.2.E3 
%%F
mammalian visual areas (such as visual cortex); but recurrent processing 
could, clearly, be implemented by other animals in their own sensory areas.G
At the less inclusive end, R1 includes more demanding computational func-
tionalist theories, on which sentience is linked to complex computations that 
may only be achievable by brain mechanisms distinctive to the primate lineage. 
The relevant mechanisms are located in granular prefrontal cortex (granular 
PFC), a part of the frontal lobe greatly expanded and elaborated in primates, 
incorporating the frontopolar, dorsolateral, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
and characterized by a notably thick layer of granular (layer IV) cortical 
neurons.H These brain regions are strongly linked to executive control functions. 
Rolls’s ‘higher- order syntactic thought’ theory gives a crucial role to these mech-
anisms.I LeDoux has at times appeared sympathetic to R1 and has emphasized 
the special processing properties of granular PFC.:J However, his most recent 
work clariﬁes that granular PFC is required only for the most cognitively 
demanding kinds of consciousness: ‘autonoetic’ and ‘noetic’ consciousness.:: He 
allows that ‘anoetic’ consciousness, which I see as much closer to the idea of sen-
tience, may be achievable in a much wider range of animals.
The R2 category includes theorists who have, for various reasons, proposed 
that neocortical neurons, and perhaps especially the large pyramidal neurons 
in layer V, may have special processing properties that allow them to support 
consciousness.:; On this view, granular PFC is not necessary, potentially 
allowing all mammals to meet the requirements, but there is something very 
special about the neocortex more generally. For Beck and Eccles, pyramidal 
layer V neurons were the most likely entry point for mental causation. For 
Stuart Hameroﬀ, they are the most likely site for a quantum process he calls 
‘orchestrated objective reduction’. For these theorists, the nucleated structure 
found in birds might not be enough.
The consensus lies not at the level of speciﬁc positions (clearly!) but rather 
at the meta- level, in the idea that everyone should be able to recognize any of 
the positions in the range R1–R5 as realistic possibilities that must be taken 
seriously in practical contexts. All positions in this range have some evidence 
behind them, conferring a degree of plausibility. Moreover, everyone should 
be able to agree on the ordering of these views from less inclusive to more 
inclusive (Fig. 6.2). Finally, everyone should be able to agree on the severe 
G Lamme (2022). Nicholas Humphrey’s (2022) theory also falls in the R3 zone.
H See Preuss and Wise (2022) for an explanation of these terms and an overview of what is known 
(and not known) about the evolution of the prefrontal cortex.
I Rolls (2004).
:J LeDoux (2023, pp. 758–759).
:: LeDoux et al. (2023).
:; Aru et al. (2020); Beck and Eccles (1992); Hameroﬀ (2022). Key (2015, 2016) also seems to have 
a view of this type.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
