2CL 
()ON,-.)/ O( 0)O0O),-ON12-,3
people who have at least read the existing advice and received some training. 
A three- month programme may be excessive, but a one- day training pro-
gramme surely would not be.
Live boiling is illegal without prior stunning in Switzerland (under the 
Tierseuchenverordnung— Animal Protection Order) and in New Zealand 
(under the Animal Welfare Regulations 2018). Switzerland, it must be noted, 
has no shellﬁsh industry, but New Zealand does, so its inclusion of decapods 
in the scope of its animal welfare laws is encouraging. It sets an example the 
rest of the world should follow.
At the time of writing, the UK’s position on this issue is a confusing one. 
Decapods are included in the scope of the Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act 
2022 as a result of my team’s report, putting policy- makers under a duty to 
pay all due regard to their welfare. Moreover, the Welfare at the Time of 
Killing (England) Regulations 2015 say that ‘no person engaged in the 
restraint, stunning or killing of an animal may (a) cause any avoidable pain, 
distress or suﬀering to that animal; or (b) permit that animal to sustain any 
avoidable pain, distress or suﬀering’ and add that ‘No person may engage in 
the restraint, stunning or killing of an animal unless that person has the 
knowledge and skill necessary to perform those operations humanely and 
eﬃciently.’ This section of the regulations (Schedule 4) explicitly includes 
invertebrate animals. Putting these facts together, it is arguably illegal to boil a 
crab or lobster alive in the UK, but there is enough ambiguity to make it 
unlikely a prosecution would be brought on these grounds. Explicit protec-
tion needs to be written into law.
We have been thinking about decapods, but how much of this also applies 
to insects? Insect farms currently use a variety of slaughter methods, includ-
ing boiling, freezing, freeze- drying, blast drying, spraying with hot water, 
mechanical crushing, and shredding.1F The variety of methods underlines the 
absence of standardized codes of good practice. One company reported on its 
website in 2023 that insects are ‘rapidly steamed using water vapor’, describ-
ing this as a humane method but without citing any evidence for its 
humaneness.;J Live boiling or steaming an insect is concerning for the same 
basic reason that boiling a crab is concerning: animals known to have 
heat- sensitive nociceptive pathways are killed using extreme heat.
A 201- page report on edible insects prepared for the UN’s Food and 
Agriculture Organization includes a paragraph on animal welfare, suggesting 
1F Rowe (2020).
;J https://web.archive.org/web/20230124015709/http://www.ynsect.com/en/faq- 2/.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
