9
People with Disorders of Consciousness
9.1 The Problem of Diagnostic Uncertainty
I opened this book with the testimony of Kate Bainbridge, wrongly presumed 
to be unconscious when she was not. This should never happen. Because the 
consequences of error are so severe, and so asymmetric, we need to take pre-
cautions to manage the risk. To say that the risks are asymmetric is not to say 
that there are no risks associated with over- ascribing sentience. There is, in 
particular, a danger of instilling unwarranted hope in a patient’s friends and 
relatives. This, however, is a danger that can be sensitively managed through 
clear communication. By contrast, to treat a human as non- sentient when 
they can feel what is happening to them creates a risk of appalling su!ering.
Around 2 to 3 in every 100,000 people will fall into a prolonged disorder of 
consciousness each year (in America, this equates to around 8,000–9,000 
people a year). Causes can include heart attacks leading to cerebral hypoxia, 
strokes, traumatic brain injuries, and tumours.1 There are now four major 
diagnostic constructs for such patients: coma, the vegetative state (also called 
‘unresponsive wakefulness syndrome’, and this terminological issue will be 
revisited later), the minimally conscious state minus, and the minimally con-
scious state plus. As the quality of intensive care continues to improve, we 
should expect an ever larger fraction of patients who in past generations 
would have died from brain injuries to instead survive in one of these states. 
Diagnosis is normally based on behaviour. This is not the place to present the 
full diagnostic criteria— please consult oﬃcial clinical guidelines, such as 
those published by the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) in 2020, on which 
I draw here— but a quick summary will be helpful.2
A patient in a coma is unrousable and unresponsive. They cannot be 
 wakened, display no sleep- wake cycle, and there are no signs of voluntary 
action or responses to painful, visual, or auditory stimuli. Some but not all 
coma patients require mechanical ventilation. Comas can be induced or 
1 The statistics and list of causes are from Wade (2018).
2 Royal College of Physicians (2020).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
