3BO. /26,6/10 2.F0./,6B43 
)CL
However, the Sentience Act is not framed in terms of sentience candidates 
or investigation priorities: the UK government required a single line to be 
drawn. Our report highlighted two options: (i) include all cephalopod molluscs 
and all decapod crustaceans in the scope of the new law, or (ii) include all 
cephalopod molluscs and only those decapods of the suborder Pleocyemata.81 
We recommended the ﬁrst option, warning that the second option would 
lead to a confusing law, since the taxonomic categories Pleocyemata and 
Dendrobranchiata are not widely used. That would have been a problem, since 
the purpose of the new law requires its implications to be easily understood 
across all government departments. This is a pragmatic reason, but pragmatic 
reasons can play a legitimate role in these decisions, especially in a context where 
a single line needs to be drawn and gradations cannot easily be accommodated.
The UK government implemented our central recommendation. At the 
same time as publishing a report, Defra tabled an amendment to its Sentience 
Bill expanding its scope to include cephalopods and decapods. That was a big 
step for invertebrate welfare in the UK. Indeed, to see any government taking 
the issue seriously was heartening. My hope is that this will set a precedent 
that other countries follow when enshrining respect for animal sentience in 
law. I hope too that it will lead to a wider conversation about the proportion-
ate steps we can take to improve the welfare of the cephalopods and decapods 
in our care. That question of proportionality will be picked up in Chapter 14.
12.10 Some Critical Reﬂections
Looking back, two aspects of the report concern me. One was outside my 
control: Defra had decided, at the point of commissioning the report, that its 
scope would be limited to two invertebrate taxa, the cephalopod molluscs 
and the decapod crustaceans. There was a rationale for a focus on these taxa. 
The cephalopods were already included in the scope of ASPA, raising a ques-
tion of whether they should also be included in the scope of other animal 
welfare laws. Meanwhile, a high- proﬁle, well- organized campaign called 
Crustacean Compassion had been calling for the inclusion of decapods. 
These reasons were pragmatic rather than scientiﬁc, and we would probably 
81 This second possibility has been defended by Comstock (2022) in his reply to Crump et al. 
(2022a). The category of ‘Reptantia’, the walking decapods, appears in the Swiss Tierseuchenverordnung 
(Animal Protection Order). But this questionably excludes caridean shrimps, which fall within the 
Pleocyemata.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
