./) Q6)1.-O5 O3 .2)A.;)5. ,-./02A,A+ 
%KL
an overriding imperative to remove the risk of su!ering. No precedent for 
other circumstances would need to be set by this. To maintain public trust 
that this legal permission was only being used in appropriate circumstances, 
it would be crucial to maintain and publish accurate data about the numbers 
of patients dying in this way— data that is currently sorely lacking.4B
Sometimes ‘slippery slope’ arguments are made in this context. A ‘slippery 
slope’ argument can, on occasion, be a well- founded attempt to warn of a 
genuine, unintended consequence of a change to practice (and we will see an 
example of this in Chapter 10). However, it can also be a fallacy. In these 
cases, the line of thought is that practice 2 would be immoral, and it is pos-
sible that practice 1 will change over time into practice 2, therefore practice 1 
is also immoral. This is unpersuasive, because it may be that the best course 
of action is to implement practice 1 and take some precautions against the 
risk that it will change into practice 2.
In the case at hand, we would simply need to make very speci8c changes to 
rules around best- interests decision- making and neuropalliative care for patients 
with a con8rmed diagnosis of a prolonged disorder of consciousness, taking care 
not to create a precedent for any other circumstances. The question of whether 
similar considerations apply to other diagnoses can be debated separately.
If we could reassure families that a humane way of hastening death will be 
available at any time if it is a patient’s best interests, there would be a major 
indirect bene8t for patients: there would be no more ‘window of opportunity’. 
The intense pressure on surrogate decision- makers to decide quickly, with the 
8rst days or weeks following injury, would be eased. There would then be a 
strong case for watching and waiting at this early stage, allowing the patient to 
stabilize and for prognostic uncertainty to be reduced. We could avoid the 
problem of the self- ful8lling prophecy and give patients a genuine chance to 
stabilize and improve, without fearing we might later have reason to regret 
having waited.
To summarize the proposals of this section:
Proposal 4. Avoid line- drawing (speciﬁc). Decisions about withdrawing 
life- sustaining treatment should be based on comprehensive assessment of 
the patient’s best interests, sensitive to the details of their case, and not on 
the PVS/MCS distinction.
4B Gray et al. (2021).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/57949 by guest on 29 July 2024
